## Introduction

Parkinson ' s disease (PD), the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder globally, encompasses a broad spectrum of classical motor symptoms -including resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability -alongside a diverse array of non-motor manifestations such as psychiatric and cognitive impairment, autonomic dysfunction, and sensory deficits (Kalia and Lang, 2015). The pathological hallmarks of PD are the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons within the substantia nigra  pars  compacta  (SNpc)  and  the  abnormal  accumulation  of  misfolded and aggregated α -synuclein, which forms Lewy bodies. In addition,  the  pathogenic  mechanisms  implicated  in  PD  also  involve  iron deposition, redox imbalance, oxidative stress, mitochondrial

## A B S T R A C T

Background: Emerging insights into the pathophysiology of Parkinson ' s disease (PD) underscore the involvement of  dysregulated  neurotransmission,  iron  accumulation  and  oxidative  stress.  Nonetheless,  the  excitatory  and inhibitory neurometabolites, the antioxidant glutathione (GSH), and magnetic susceptibility are seldom studied together in the clinical PD literature.

Methods: We acquired MEGA-PRESS and multi-echo gradient echo sequences from 60 PD patients and 47 healthy controls (HCs). Magnetic resonance spectroscopy voxels were respectively positioned in the midbrain to quantify neurotransmitter including γ -aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate plus glutamine, and in the left striatum to estimate GSH levels. Group differences in metabolite levels normalized to total creatine (Cr) and their clinical relevance were determined. Furthermore, relationships among GSH levels, neurotransmitter estimates and susceptibility values were explored in both PD patients and HCs.

Results: PD patients exhibited reduced midbrain GABA levels (P = 0.034, PFDR = 0.136), diminished GSH in the left  striatum  (P = 0.032, PFDR = 0.096), and increased susceptibility values in the substantia nigra (PFDR &lt; 0.001). Mesencephalic choline levels were correlated with the severity of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorders  symptoms,  whereas  striatal  N-acetylaspartate  levels  were  linked  to  Hoehn-Yahr  stage  and  motor symptom severity. Notably, the disruption of associations between striatal GSH levels and susceptibility values in globus pallidus, as well as midbrain GABA levels, were evident in PD.

Conclusions: These findings  offer  compelling  evidence  for  metabolic  dysregulation  in  PD,  characterized  by  a concomitant reduction in GABA and GSH levels, alongside iron deposition.

dysfunction,  synaptic  defects,  and  disturbance  of  neurotransmission systems (Zhao et al., 2023). However, a comprehensive understanding of the interactions among these molecular mechanisms in PD, remains elusive.

The  GABAergic  system,  comprised  of  neurons  that  secrete  the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), plays a critical role in maintaining neuronal inhibition and preventing neuronal hyper-excitability  (Lee  et  al.,  2019).  In  this  regard,  dysfunction  of GABAergic  systems  is  implicated  in  several  neurodegenerative  and neuropsychiatric disorders, including Alzheimer ' s disease, PD, epilepsy, anxiety, and panic disorders (Wong et al., 2003; Shetty and Bates, 2016). As the basal ganglia circuitry is responsible for the correct execution of voluntary  movements,  the  canonical  model  of  PD  posits  that  motor

* Corresponding authors at: Department of Radiology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, No.1095, Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan 430030, China.

E-mail addresses: qinyuanyuan-1021@163.com (Y. Qin), zhuwenzhen8612@163.com (W. Zhu).

## [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2025.103740](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2025.103740)

S. Yan et al.

symptoms arise from degenerated GABAergic and glutamatergic innervation  of  the  efferent  projections  of  the  SNpc  and  globus  pallidus internus (GPi) (DeLong, 1990). The loss of dopamine-releasing neurons in  the  SNpc  might  reduce  postsynaptic activation  of  GABA receptors thereby causing hyperexcitability of striatal neurons, which manifests as dyskinesia in PD (Melani and Tritsch, 2022). In addition, reduction of GABA  dysregulates  Ca 2 + voltage-gated  channels  leading  to  Ca 2 + -induced excitotoxicity and oxidative stress to stimulate α -synuclein aggregation and injury of dopaminergic neurons (Leandrou et al., 2019). Increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) and iron can further combine to cause neurotransmitter dysfunction (Bj ø rklund et al.,  2019). Autopsy evidence of PD confirms disruption of GABAergic neurons in the basal ganglia (Gerlach et al., 1996). Decreased neurosteroids in PD could also affect the synthesis of neuronal GABA (Luchetti et al., 2011). A Positron Emission  Computed  Tomography  study  observed  the  coexistence  of GABAergic dysfunction and dopaminergic loss in the putamen (PUT) and extrastriatal regions in patients with early PD (Takashima et al., 2022). Over recent years, there has been a growing interest in detecting GABA alterations in PD patients through the spectral editing technique, Mescher-GArwood Point Resolved Spectroscopy (MEGA-PRESS) (Mescher  et  al.,  1998).  Nevertheless,  the  imaging  literature  presents conflicting results regarding GABAergic alterations of PD patients due to variable voxel positioning (Terkelsen et al., 2022), and few studies have addressed GABA changes at the midbrain level. A deeper understanding of GABAergic dysfunction and compensatory regulation in the midbrain may provide crucial insights into novel diagnostic or therapeutic strategies for PD.

Glutathione (GSH) serves as a pivotal antioxidant and redox regulator  in  the  brain,  neutralizing  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS)  and thereby mitigating the damage caused by hydroxyl radicals, peroxynitrite,  and  superoxide  radicals.  Oxidative  stress  has  been  strongly implicated in the neuronal cell death associated with PD (Adams et al., 2001). Numerous studies have demonstrated that PD patients frequently show elevated oxidative stress and diminished GSH levels (Trist et al., 2019). Regional variations in brain GSH concentrations follow the order: cortex &gt; cerebellum &gt; hippocampus &gt; striatum &gt; substantia nigra (SN), with levels declining by 30 % during normal aging (Chen et al., 1989). Dopaminergic  neurons  in  the  SNpc  are  particularly  vulnerable  to oxidative insult due to the ROS generated during dopamine metabolism. The GSH losses might be a causative factor in PD, contributing to the selective  inhibition  of  mitochondrial  complex  I  activity  (Jha  et  al., 2000),  and  the  aggregation  of  misfolded  proteins  (Jha  et  al.,  2002). Additionally, the generation of hydroxyl radical via the Fenton reaction, driven by iron deposition in PD, can exacerbate the GSH redox imbalances  and  oxidative  stress  (Andersen,  2001).  Advanced  edited  spectroscopy sequences for robust GSH quantification have been applied to investigate how brain GSH levels vary with age and their associations with cognitive function (Hu et al., 2024). However, it remains unclear whether GSH depletion occur in the striatum of PD, and how it relates to other key factors involved in the pathophysiology. In addition to GABA and GSH, other neurometabolites may also play important roles in the pathogenesis  of  PD.  Meta-analysis  and  review  studies  have  reported inconsistent metabolic changes in the SN, GP, hippocampus, thalamus and some cortical regions, with a more consistent result of lower NAcetylaspartate (NAA) levels in the SN and GP, which can be used as an early diagnostic indicator of PD (Abbaspour et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2022). Although there were a few studies exploring the related metabolic abnormalities of non-motor symptoms in PD (Guan et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2023), we still lack the knowledge of the relationships of midbrain and striatal alterations with certain symptom severity, such as sleeping quality scales.

Given the central role of the mesostriatal pathway in PD, we simultaneously  employed  spectra-editing  of  GABA,  GSH  and  quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM) to reveal disease-specific alterations in these critical structures. Our objectives were (1) to determine whether midbrain GABA/Glx (glutamate and glutamine) and left striatal GSH

levels  differ  between  PD  patients  and  healthy  controls  (HCs);  (2)  to examine correlations between metabolite levels and disease severity or clinical symptoms in PD; and (3) to explore potential interactions between GSH, GABA/Glx abnormalities and iron deposition in PD and HCs.

## 2. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Study subjects

This research was conducted following approval from the Institutional Review Board of our hospital. Patients with a clinical diagnosis of PD documented in the neurological medical records and who underwent MRI/MRS scanning in the Department of Radiology between January 2024 and June 2024 were eligible for the study cohort. Inclusion criteria for the PD group were: (1) no prior deep brain stimulation surgery; (2) and absence of a history of stroke, brain trauma, intracranial surgery or other  neurological  or  psychiatric  disorders.  We  also  recruited  the middle-aged  and  elderly  HCs  from  the  community  via  public  advertisement.  The  exclusion  criteria  for  the  HCs  group  included:  (1)  the presence of severe systemic diseases, a history of intracranial tumors, cerebrovascular diseases, or brain trauma; (2) contraindications to MRI scans; and (3) obvious abnormalities on MRI images. All participants were confirmed to be right-handed. Before the MRI scan, each participant was evaluated using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Pittsburgh sleep quality index (PSQI), and Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder Questionnaire-Hong Kong Version (RBDQ-HK). The evaluation for PD patients also included the Hoehn and Yahr stage and the third section of the Movement Disorders Society Unified Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS-III). Disease duration was expressed as years since first symptom of a cardinal motor parkinsonism manifestation according to the patient self-report in the electronic medical records. MRI examinations and clinical assessment were conducted in the  OFF-state  withdrawing  drugs  at  least  12  h.  Levodopa  equivalent daily  dose  (LEDD)  was  calculated  according  to  a  published  method (Tomlinson et al., 2010).

## 2.2. MRI examination

MRI scanning was performed on a 3.0-Tesla MR scanner (Elition X, Philips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) with a 32-channel head coil. Routine sequences included T1-weighted images (T1WI), T2-weighted images (T2WI), T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images with similar parameters with the previous study (Kim et  al.,  2024).  High-resolution  3D  T1-weighted  turbo  field  echo  scans were acquired as anatomical references with the following parameters: repetition time (TR) = 6.6 ms; echo time (TE) = 3.0 ms; slice thickness = 1 mm; number of slices = transversal 165 slices; field of view (FOV) = 224 mm 2; matrix size = 224 × 224; and acquisition time = 3  min 20  s. Susceptibility-weighted imaging was obtained using a multi-echo fast field echo sequence with the following parameters: TR = 42 ms; ten echoes with TE = 4.1 ms to 40.1 ms at 4 ms intervals; FOV = 240 × 240 mm 2 ; flip angle = 20 ◦ ; matrix size = 240 × 240; number of slices = 70; slice thickness = 2 mm and no gap; phase encoding SENSE acceleration factor = 2; acquisition time = 4  min 20 s.

For  the  detection  of  GABA/Glx,  we  utilized  the  MEGA-PRESS sequence, localized in midbrain voxels (15 × 25 × 30 mm 3 ), with parameters: TR/TE = 2000/68 ms; spectral bandwidth = 2000 Hz; free induction decay = 1024 points; number of signal averages = 128 (both ON and OFF spectra were repeated by 64 times); ON/OFF frequencies = 1.89/7.46 ppm; VAPOR water suppression; automated first-order pencil beam (PB) shimming; acquisition time = 8  min 48  s. The midbrain voxels were centered left -right, with the posterior face aligned to the posterior face of the midbrain on axial images, and on sagittal images, the voxels were positioned cranially/caudally to maximize inclusion of midbrain tissue. For GSH quantification, MEGA-PRESS was employed with voxels (25 × 30 × 30 mm 3 ) placed in the left striatum (head of

Region: midbrain

Voxel = 15 × 25 × 30 mm

caudate nucleus (CAU), PUT and part of GP). The parameters were as follows: TR/TE = 2000/130 ms; spectral bandwidth = 2000 Hz; free induction decay = 1024 points; number of signal averages = 128; ON/ OFF frequencies at 4.56/1.44 ppm; VAPOR water suppression; secondorder PB shimming; acquisition time = 8  min 48  s. The left striatum

Region: striatum

Voxel = 25 × 30 x 30 mm

Edit frequency = 4.56 ppm voxels were placed on axial images between the left lateral sulcus and the  left  lateral  ventricle,  with  the  anterior  border  aligned  with  the medial midpoint of CAU, and the sagittal superior border along the floor of the lateral ventricle body. We chose the left striatum as the VOI, a decision  based  on  handedness  (all  subjects  are  right-handed).  Water

Fig. 1. Representative MRS voxel placement, averaged-ON, averaged-OFF, edited difference spectra and spectral fitting. (A) In vivo brain GABA/Glx detection using MEGA-PRESS (ON/OFF = 1.89/7.46  ppm) in the midbrain region with size of 15 × 25 × 30 mm. (B) In vivo brain GSH detection using MEGA-PRESS (ON/OFF = 4.56/1.44  ppm) in the left striatum region with size of 25 × 30 × 30 mm. GABA, γ -aminobutyric acidaspartate; Glx, glutamate and glutamine; GSH, glutathione; MEGA-PRESS, Mescher-Garwood Point-Resolved Spectroscopy.

non-suppressed spectra were also obtained with 4 signal averages as an internal  reference.  In  the  resulting  spectrum,  the  signal  at  3  ppm  is labeled  GABA + ,  incorporating  contributions  from  macromolecules (MM).

## 2.3. MRS data processing and quantification

The GABA and GSH edited spectra were analyzed using the Gannet 3.0 software toolkit (Edden et al., 2014) embedded in MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA). The processing steps included coilcombination, alignment of individual averages, 3-Hz exponential line broadening,  Fourier  transformation,  frequency  and  phase  correction, artifact rejection based on frequency deviation ( &gt; 3 standard deviation (SD) from the mean), time averaging, and generation of the edited difference spectrum and the edit-OFF spectrum. GABA + , Glx, GSH peaks, as  well  as  NAA,  Creatine  (Cr),  and  Choline  (Cho)  peaks  were  fitted respectively on the difference spectrum and the edit-OFF spectra using Gaussian line-shape models. Metabolites were quantified relative to the total Cr signal at 3.0  ppm from the OFF-averaged spectrum (/Cr) due to its greater stability and robustness compared to H2O. PD patients might experience changes of water concentration in the SN and striatum (Drori et  al.,  2022;  Chen et al., 2023). To further demonstrate that Cr concentrations  remained  unaltered  between  the  two  groups,  metabolite concentrations were also quantified relative to the extra acquired water signal (/H2O) to conduct intergroup comparisons. The full width at half maximum (FWHM) for Cr and H2O signals were recorded.

In order to determine structural alterations in MRS voxels, structural T1WI images were segmented via SPM software (https://www.fil.ion. ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12) into gray matter (GM), white matter (WM), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and registered to the MRS voxel (Near et al., 2021). Water-scaled metabolites were corrected for partial volume effects, accounting for the tissue composition within individual MRS  voxels  and  tissue-specific  relaxation  properties  (Harris  et  al., 2015). The FitError, representing the standard deviation of the fitting residual relative to the amplitude of the fitted peaks, was calculated to reflect signal-to-noise ratio and fitting effect. Only the edited difference spectra with a FitError below 15 % for the striatum (GSH) and 20 % for the  midbrain  (GABA/Glx)  and  their  corresponding  edit-OFF  spectra were included in the final analysis, as it sets the threshold for acceptance of  the  GABA/Glx  and  GSH  fit.  Representative  voxel  placements  and spectra of HCs are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. S1.

## 2.4. QSM reconstruction

According to the recognized consensus (Bilgic et al., 2024), QSM was reconstructed using the morphology-enabled dipole inversion with an automatic uniform cerebrospinal fluid zero referenced algorithm (MEDI + 0) (Liu et al., 2018). Firstly, to estimate the total field, non-linear fitting  was applied to the multi-echo gradient echo images, followed by spatial unwrapping using a quality-guided region-growing algorithm (Cusack and Papadakis, 2002). The projection onto dipole fields algorithm  was  then  used  to  remove  the  background  field,  enabling  the generation of the local field. At last, the local field was inverted to the final  susceptibility  map,  expressed  in  parts  per  billion  (ppb),  using morphology  enabled  dipole  inversion  (Liu  et  al.,  2012).  During  the dipole inversion process, we also performed automatic segmentation of the ventricular CSF mask by thresholding the R2* maps and imposing connectivity. Structural priors (edges) were determined from magnitude images and regularization terms. This additional procedure enforced a homogeneous  susceptibility  distribution  within  the  ventricular  CSF, establishing the CSF as a consistent zero reference for QSM.

The striatal and midbrain nuclei including CAU, PUT, GP, SN, and red nucleus (RN), were semi-automatically segmented in the following procedure. The QSM images in the native space were firstly registered to the age-specific QSM template derived from a cohort of 51 60 years old brains (Zhang et al., 2018) using ANTs-SyN script (ANTs v2.3.0).

Then  the  labels  of  these  nuclei  were  warped  to  the  individual  QSM native space by using the inverted transformation matrix. Finally, the resulting  masks  were  visually  inspected  and  manually  edited  by  an experienced  neuroradiologist  (B.D.,  seven  years  of  experience)  who blinded  to  the  subgroups.  We  used  the  Fslstats  tool  (FSL  v6.0.4)  to extract mean susceptibility values of each nucleus.

## 2.5. Statistical analysis

Normality of continuous variables was assessed using the ShapiroWilk test. Demographic and clinical characteristics were presented as means ± SD  or  as  medians  with  interquartile  ranges  (25th-75th percentile).  Demographic and clinical  data were compared using the Pearson  chi-squared  test,  the  independent  two-sample t -test  or  the Mann-Whitney U test as appropriate.

All MRS metabolites except for Glx and GSH were normally distributed.  Intergroup  differences  in  midbrain  GABA + /Glx,  striatal  GSH, other  metabolites  (NAA,  Cr,  and  Cho),  FitError,  FWHM,  brain  tissue fractions, and susceptibility values were analyzed using two-tailed twosample t -test  or  Mann-Whitney U test.  False  discovery  rate  (FDR) correction was performed on the comparisons for different metabolites within the same region and susceptibility values across several nuclei. As clinical  scores  were  non-normally  distributed,  correlation  between metabolite  levels  and  clinical  assessment  scales  (including  disease duration, LEDD, the Hoehn and Yahr Stage, MDS-UPDRSIII score, MMSE score, PSQI and RBDQ-HK score) were assessed using Spearman ' s rank correlation coefficients.

Moreover, relationships  between mesencephalic GABA/Glx levels, striatal GSH levels and susceptibility values of subcortical nuclei were explored using Spearman ' s rank correlation coefficient in both PD and HCs groups. Age and sex correlations with MRI data were analyzed using Spearman ' s rank and Point-Biserial correlations, respectively. If significant, age and sex were included as covariates in the analyses. The significant level was set as p &lt; 0.05. All statistical tests were conducted using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (version 22.0; SPSS, Chicago, IL).

## 3. Results

## 3.1. Demographic and clinical information

A total of 60 PD patients and 47 HCs with MRS data were included in the study. The two groups were matched in terms of age (59.43 ± 7.37 vs. 57.11 ± 6.85 years, P = 0.098) and had comparable proportions of male/female participants (24/36 vs. 18/29, P = 0.858). Clinical evaluation  revealed  that  PD  patients  exhibited  significantly  impaired cognitive function (MMSE: P = 0.005) and poorer sleep quality (PSQI: P = 0.003 and RBDQ-HK: P &lt; 0.001) relative to HCs. The detailed characteristics of all participants were displayed in Table 1. No significant correlations between metabolite levels and age or sex were observed.

## 3.2. Neurometabolic alterations at the midbrain level

According to Tables S1, there were no differences in midbrain and striatal Cr/H2O between PD and HCs groups. Therefore, the following analyses were performed on the Cr-referenced metabolites. High-quality MRS data from the midbrain were available for 49 PD patients and 38 HCs, with scans exhibiting head movement artifacts (visual inspection) or poor spectral fitting (FitError below 20 %) excluded from analysis (Table 2 and Fig. 2). The analyzed two groups were age (P = 0.163) and sex (P = 0.734) matched. In comparison to HCs, PD patients demonstrated  lower  levels  of  GABA + /Cr  (0.127  vs.  0.140,  Cohen ' s  d = 0.468, P = 0.034, PFDR = 0.136) in the midbrain. Although not significant  after  correction  for  multiple  comparisons,  the  metabolite  we focused on in the midbrain was GABA, and the results still reflected a descending trend. No significant differences were observed between the

Table 1 Demographic and clinical characteristics for all subjects.

|                          | PD (n = 60)     | HCs (n = 47)   | P-value   |
| Age (years)              | 59.43 ± 7.37    | 57.11 ± 6.85   | 0.098 a   |
| Sex (male/female)        | 24/36           | 18/29          | 0.858 b   |
| Disease duration (years) | 3.0 (1.0 - 4.0) |                |           |
| Hoehn-Yahr stage         | 2.5 (1.5 - 2.5) |                |           |
| MDS-UPDRSIII             | 32 (18 - 45)    |                |           |
| LEDD (mg)                | 475 (350 - 700) |                |           |
| MMSE                     | 27 (25 - 29)    | 28 (27 - 29)   | 0.005 c   |
| PSQI                     | 7.5 (5 - 12.5)  | 4 (3 - 9)      | 0.003 c   |
| RBDQ-HK                  | 10.5 (5 - 22)   | 5 (3 - 7)      | < 0.001 c |

Values are represented by mean ± standard deviation or median (25 %-75 % percentiles) according to their normality.

PD, Parkinson ' s disease; HCs, healthy controls; MDS-UPDRS-III, the third part of the MDS-Unified Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale; LEDD, levodopa equivalent daily  dosage; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; PSQI, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality  Index;  RBDQ-HK,  Rapid  Eye  Movement  Sleep  Behavior  Disorder Questionnaire-Hong Kong Version.

a two-sample t -test, b χ 2 test, c Nonparametric Mann-Whitney test.

/Glx,  GSH,  other  metabolites  measurement,  spectral quality metrics and voxel tissue composition in the midbrain and left striatum

Table 2 Comparisons  of  GABA + regions between PD and HCs groups.

|                         | PD             | HCs            | P-value   |   P FDR |
| Midbrain level          | N = 49         | N = 38         |           |         |
| GABA + /Cr              | 0.127 ± 0.031  | 0.140 ± 0.028  | 0.034*    |   0.136 |
| GABA + _FitError_Cr (%) | 11.250 ± 2.987 | 10.551 ± 3.634 | 0.328     |         |
| Glx/Cr                  | 0.067 ± 0.027  | 0.063 ± 0.026  | 0.317     |   0.634 |
| Glx_FitError_Cr (%)     | 14.352 ± 4.064 | 14.659 ± 4.074 | 0.728     |         |
| NAA/Cr                  | 1.985 ± 0.223  | 1.973 ± 0.168  | 0.782     |   0.782 |
| Cho/Cr                  | 0.515 ± 0.070  | 0.509 ± 0.046  | 0.613     |   0.782 |
| FWHM Cr (Hz)            | 9.194 ± 1.266  | 9.397 ± 0.915  | 0.406     |         |
| GM fraction             | 0.041 ± 0.014  | 0.038 ± 0.010  | 0.432     |         |
| WM fraction             | 0.909 ± 0.032  | 0.914 ± 0.017  | 0.308     |         |
| CSF fraction            | 0.051 ± 0.021  | 0.047 ± 0.011  | 0.318     |         |
| Striatum level          | N = 53         | N = 41         |           |         |
| GSH/Cr                  | 0.066 ± 0.022  | 0.089 ± 0.053  | 0.032*    |   0.096 |
| GSH_FitError_Cr (%)     | 11.320 ± 2.405 | 10.736 ± 2.779 | 0.278     |         |
| NAA/Cr                  | 1.749 ± 0.188  | 1.802 ± 0.149  | 0.145     |   0.145 |
| Cho/Cr                  | 0.392 ± 0.043  | 0.380 ± 0.031  | 0.118     |   0.145 |
| FWHM Cr (Hz)            | 8.375 ± 0.659  | 8.393 ± 0.722  | 0.904     |         |
| GM fraction             | 0.484 ± 0.036  | 0.483 ± 0.032  | 0.908     |         |
| WM fraction             | 0.441 ± 0.043  | 0.463 ± 0.040  | 0.012*    |         |
| CSF fraction            | 0.075 ± 0.040  | 0.054 ± 0.023  | 0.001*    |         |

GABA, γ -aminobutyric  acidaspartate;  Glx,  glutamate  and  glutamine;  GSH, glutathione; FWHM, full width at half maximum; GM, gray matter; WM, white matter;  CSF,  cerebrospinal  fluid;  NAA,  N-acetylaspartate;  Cr,  creatine;  Cho, choline; PD, Parkinson ' s  disease;  HCs, healthy controls; FDR, false discovery rate. Asterisk indicates significance before multiple comparisons corrections.

groups in the Glx/Cr or other metabolites in the midbrain (P &gt; 0.05, PFDR &gt; 0.05). The fractions of GM (P = 0.432), WM (P = 0.308), and CSF (P = 0.318) within the MRS acquisition voxel was also comparable between  PD  patients  and  HCs.  In  terms  of  clinical  correlations,  the mesencephalic Cho (rho = 0.412, P = 0.003) levels exhibited significant negative correlations with the severity of RBD symptoms, a wellestablished predictor of neurodegenerative disease.

## 3.3. Glutathione depletion at the striatum level

MRS data within the left striatum voxel (FitError below 15 %) obtained from 53 PD patients and 45 HCs are summarized in Table 2 and Fig. 3. The analyzed two groups were age (P = 0.080) and sex (P = 0.992)  matched.  Cr-referenced  GSH  levels  was  depleted  in  the  left striatum of PD patients (0.066 vs. 0.089, Cohen ' s  d = 0.524, P = 0.032,  PFDR = 0.096).  Likewise,  this  indicated  a  trend  toward  GSH reduction. No significant changes were found in the levels of NAA (P =

0.145, PFDR = 0.145) and Cho (P = 0.118, PFDR = 0.145) in the left striatum.  Additionally,  NAA  levels  within  the  left  striatum  voxels exhibited significant negative correlations with Hoehn-Yahr stage (rho = 0.300, P = 0.029) and MDS-UPDRSIII score (rho = 0.374, P = 0.006). PD patients showed lower WM fractions (P = 0.012), higher CSF fractions (P = 0.001), but similar GM fractions (P = 0.908) compared with HCs.

## 3.4. Iron accumulation in the subcortical nuclei

Intergroup  comparisons  for  susceptibility  values  are  illustrated  in Fig. 4A. PD patients showed significantly increased susceptibility values in the SN (146.150 vs. 124.920, Cohen ' s d = 0.801, P &lt; 0.001, PFDR &lt; 0.001)  relative  to  HCs,  suggesting  increased  iron  deposition.  Higher mean  susceptibility  was  also  observed  in  the  left  CAU  (58.447  vs. 55.281, Cohen ' s d = 0.234, P = 0.233, PFDR = 0.233), PUT (67.959 vs. 58.733, Cohen ' s d = 0.234, P = 0.430, PFDR = 0.053), GP (141.795 vs. 129.032, Cohen ' s d = 0.339, P = 0.085, PFDR = 0.106) and RN (127.690 vs. 115.469, Cohen ' s d = 0.408, P = 0.032, PFDR = 0.053), though these differences did not reach statistical significance after multiple comparisons correction.

## 3.5. Association between GABA/Glx, GSH levels and susceptibility values

The relationships between neurometabolic alterations (GABA + and GSH) and susceptibility values in deep gray matter nuclei were explored within the midbrain and left striatum regions (Fig. 4B and Table 3). A significant association between GSH levels and susceptibility values was observed in the GP of the HCs group (rho = 0.394, P = 0.011), but not in PD patients. No correlations between GABA/Glx levels and susceptibility values of the SN or RN were found within the midbrain voxels. As key nodes of the mesostriatal circuit, connected via synaptic pathways, midbrain GABA levels in HCs were positively correlated with GSH levels in the downstream striatum (rho = 0.492, P = 0.004) -a relationship that was not observed in PD patients.

## 4. Discussion

By  integrating  spectral  editing  with  quantitative  susceptibility mapping, this study provided in vivo measurements of neurometabolites and  magnetic  susceptibility  to  reveal  metabolic  dysfunction  of  the mesostriatal circuit in PD. Primary findings indicated diminished GABA levels  in  the  midbrain,  reduced  GSH  levels  in  the  left  striatum,  and increased  susceptibility  values -attributed  to  iron  deposition -in  the midbrain and striatum of PD patients compared to HCs. The correlation between GSH depletion and increased GP susceptibility of healthy aging was not observed in PD. Similarly, the transsynaptic relationships between striatal  GSH and  inhibitory  neurotransmitters  in  the  midbrain were significantly altered by PD pathology.

In  alignment  with  MRS  studies  localized  to  the  midbrain  region (Song et al., 2021a,b; Shukla et al., 2023), we observed a reduction in midbrain  GABA  levels  of  PD  patients  compared  to  HCs,  based  on  a relatively larger sample size. Similarly, a proton 9.4 T MRS study also found  lower  T2,  GABA/Cr  and  NAA/Cr  in  the  left  SN  of  1-methyl1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-intoxicated marmoset monkey models of PD, supporting our findings (Heo et al., 2017). GABA has been shown to exert a protective effect on dopaminergic neurons (DNs) in SNpc, probably though inhibition of pro-inflammatory signaling pathways (Liu et al., 2015). Moreover, the interaction between dopamine and GABA is complex. Dopamine is co-released with GABA in the SNpc, and DNs modulate striatal inhibition through presynaptic activation of GABA receptors (Melani and Tritsch, 2022) as well as dopamine receptor 2 signaling in medium spiny neurons (Lemos et al., 2016). Therefore, degeneration of DNs in PD profoundly affects the GABAergic circuitry of the SNpc, with decreased GABA levels potentially exacerbating neuroinflammation  and  oxidative  stress,  both  of  which  contribute  to  PD

olite

0.3- ta

Metabolites/[tCr]

GABA+

Disease duration

rho = - 0.412

GSH

rho = - 0.300

p = 0.029

NAA

LEDD

Fig. 2. Neurometabolic alteration at the midbrain level. (A) GABA + estimates were decreased in the midbrain of PD patients (P = 0.034, PFDR = 0.136). GABA + , Glx, and Cho estimates were on the left Y axis while the NAA level was on the right Y axis. (B-C) Cho estimates correlated with the RBDQ-HK score (rho = 0.412, 95 %CI: 0.626139, P = 0.003). *P (uncorrected) &lt; 0.05 was set as a significant level. GABA, γ -aminobutyric acidaspartate; Glx, glutamate and glutamine; NAA, N-Acetylaspartate;  Cr,  Creatine;  Cho,  Choline;  PD,  Parkinson ' s  disease;  HCs,  healthy  controls;  RBDQ-HK,  Rapid  Eye  Movement  Sleep  Behavior  Disorder Questionnaire-Hong Kong Version.

Fig. 3. Neurometabolites measured in the left striatum. (A) GSH/Cr were lower in the PD group (P = 0.032, PFDR = 0.096). GSH and Cho estimates were on the left Y axis while the NAA level was on the right Y axis. (B-C) Negative relationships between NAA levels and disease severity were found in PD patients (Hoehn-Yahr stage: rho = 0.300, 95 %CI: 0.5340.025, P = 0.029; MDS-UPDRSIII: rho = 0.374, 95 %CI: 0.590107, P = 0.006). *P (uncorrected) &lt; 0.05 was set as a significant level. GSH, glutathione; NAA, N-Acetylaspartate; Cr, Creatine; Cho, Choline; PD, Parkinson ' s disease; HCs, healthy controls; MDS-UPDRSIII, the third part of Movement disorders society revised Unified Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale.

neuropathology. In 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-induced mice models of PD, GABA agonists have been shown to restore GABAergic inhibition, balance striatal cholinergic excitatory and alleviate motor symptoms (Lozovaya et al., 2018). Furthermore, 5-HT and GABA along with autologous bone  marrow  cell supplementation significantly ameliorated  6-OHDA induced  lipid  peroxidation  (Kuruvilla  et  al., 2013). The GABA pathology of PD offered the therapeutic strategy of neuroprotection  against  unbalanced  excitatory  cholinergic  drive  and oxidative stress damage. Glx, NAA and Cho levels were similar in PD patient and HCs, consistent with previous studies reporting no metabolite differences between PD patients and control subjects (Huang et al., 2023; Kickler et al., 2007; Weiduschat et al., 2015). Of note, the 3.7 ppm peak includes glutamate, glutamine, and glutathione peaks ( ¨ Oz et al., 2006). Although GSH peaks are not prominent compared to glutamate and glutamine peaks, we should be cautious about the results about quantitative measurements of Glx. NAA, Glx and Cho are markers of neuronal integrity, synaptic function and membrane metabolism. This suggests that in the early onset of PD in cases with normal cognition, there are no serious neuronal degenerations (Huang et al., 2023).

Numerous brainstem nuclei are engaged in fundamental homeostatic mechanisms,  including  gastrointestinal  regulation,  pain  perception, mood control, and sleep-wake cycles (Grinberg et al., 2010), which is responsible for non-motor symptoms in PD. Previous studies reported that  depleted  GABA  levels  in  the  motor  cortex  and  thalamus  were related to increasing motor symptoms in PD, indicating modulation by enhanced excitability in the primary motor cortex (van Nuland et al., 2020; Pesch et al., 2019). Therefore, we propose that reduced brainstem GABA is likely associated with nonmotor symptoms. However, in our study,  Cho levels showed correlations with RBDQ-HK scores. RBD, a prodromal  syndrome  of α -synuclein  neurodegenerative  disease,  is characterized by the loss of physiological muscle atonia during Rapid Eye  Movement  (REM)  sleep,  leading  to  dream  enactment  behaviors (Gilat et al., 2022). Substantial evidence supports the role of brainstem dysfunction,  such  neuronal  cell  loss  in  the  locus  subcoeruleus,  the

Depleted GSH leves

PD

· HCS

Fig. 4. Associations between GSH and susceptibility values of striatal nuclei. (A) Intergroup comparisons in subcortical susceptibility values between PD and HCs. Left striatal and bilateral midbrain nuclei masks were mapped on the QSM maps. (B) A significant inverse relationship was identified between GSH striatum region and susceptibility values of the GP in HCs (rho = 0.394, P = 0.011). *** FDR corrected P &lt; 0.001. GSH, glutathione; PD, Parkinson ' s disease; HCs, healthy controls; CAU, caudate nucleus; PUT, putamen; GP, globus pallidus; QSM, quantitative susceptibility mapping.

Table 3 Correlation between left striatal GSH and mesencephalic excitatory/inhibitory neurotransmitters.

| Midbrain neurotransmitters   | Left striatal GSH   | Left striatal GSH   | Left striatal GSH   | Left striatal GSH   |
|                              | PD group            | PD group            | HCs group           | HCs group           |
|                              | rho                 | p-value             | rho                 | p-value             |
| GABA                         | 0.194               | 0.218               | 0.492               | 0.004*              |
| Glx                          | 0.154               | 0.331               | 0.061               | 0.704               |
| E/I                          | 0.262               | 0.093               | 0.169               | 0.354               |

GABA, γ -aminobutyric acidaspartate; Glx, glutamate and glutamine; E/I, excitatory/inhibitory  neurotransmitters  ratio;  GSH,  glutathione;  PD,  Parkinson ' s disease; HCs, healthy controls.

pedunculopontine nucleus and the gigantocellular reticular nucleus in the pathological basis of RBD (Iranzo et al., 2009). The decreased Cho/ Cr  ratio  in  the  pontine  tegmentum  in  another  RBD  study  might  be attributed to neuronal injury and decreased metabolic rate (Zhang et al., 2016). Since in the present study there was the apparent correlation between Cho levels and RBD symptoms, no significant differences in midbrain Cho observed at the group level might be interpreted that only a small part of PD patients with RBD symptoms had lower Cho levels. No clinical relevance of GABA suggests either insufficient statistical power due to small sample and high heterogeneity of PD patients or a lack of detailed evaluation in PD symptoms (Takashima et al., 2022).

Both blood measures of GSH and cerebral GSH levels by MRS were shown to be decreased in PD, providing a possible early PD biomarker to reflect  high  oxidative  damage  (Holmay  et  al.,  2013;  Mischley  et  al., 2016). A recent MRS study using MEGA-PRESS sequences demonstrated significant GSH depletion in the SN and left hippocampal regions of PD patients (Shukla et al., 2023). In MPTP-intoxicated marmoset, the nigral GSH concentrations measured by MRS were lower (although not statistically significant) than those of the control group (Heo et al., 2017). In experimental rat model of PD, histological results showed L-theanine decreased oxidative stress and restored GSH in the striatum tissue of brain  (Kumar  et  al.,  2023).  Together  with  our  observation  of  GSH

reduction in the left striatum of PD, these findings support the hypothesis  that  GSH  depletion  may  occur  widely  throughout  the  brain, affecting  regions  such  as  the  cerebral  cortex,  hippocampus,  SN,  and striatum. Pathologically, α -synuclein may impair mitochondrial function, disrupting redox homeostasis and amplifying oxidative stress (Park et  al.,  2020).  Conversely,  the  oxidation  of  methionine  residues  of α -synuclein can trigger its fibrillation and aggregation (Chaves et al., 2010). This molecular cascade reaction would eventually produce more ROS in regions where α -synuclein propagates, consuming more GSH to neutralize ROS. However, we did not find any relationships between GSH levels and clinical scores. Depletion of GSH occurs in the brain areas responsible for cognition function in mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer ' s Disease, and GSH levels in the hippocampus and frontal cortices  are  positively  correlated  with  MMSE  scores  (Mandal  et  al., 2015). GSH levels in the motor cortex may be more informed of motor dysfunction in PD. Besides, our findings show that more advanced PD, as indicated by higher Hoehn-Yahr stages and MDS-UPDRS-III scores, was associated with lower NAA/Cr ratios in the left striatum. Although the reduction in NAA in the left striatum was not statistically significant, it displayed a decreasing tendency of NAA which reflect neuronal loss or dysfunction in PD. In addition, in the present study, the factors of disease duration  and  LEDD  did  not  correlate  with  metabolite  levels  in  the midbrain and striatum. The relationship between metabolites and PD disease progression requires more longitudinal investigation to explore. Several studies did not find any effect of levodopa on metabolic levels in the targeted areas through two measurements before and after administration (van Nuland et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2024). The alleviation of Parkinsonian  symptoms  by  levodopa  may  not  alter  the  changes  of metabolite levels imposed by PD pathology.

Our results confirm the accumulation of excess iron in the striatal and midbrain nuclei of PD patients, as previously reported (Guan et al., 2024).  Neuromelanin  in  SNpc  dopaminergic  neurons  are  major  iron storage molecules that accumulate with age and are accompanied by iron deposition, and it impairs neuronal function and triggers the PD pathology when exceeding a specific threshold (Vila, 2019). It is wellknown  that  iron  is  a  major  pro-oxidant  in  the  brain  and  actively

GSH/Cr

participates in redox reactions (Ward et al., 2014). Elevated iron load in PD contributes to oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and the subsequent disruption of synaptic dysfunction and neurotransmission (Zhao et al., 2023). Prior studies have highlighted the concurrent GSH depletion  and  increased  susceptibility  in  PD  patients  (Shukla  et  al., 2023). Our findings extend this by demonstrating a significant correlation between iron accumulation in the GP and GSH levels in HCs, but not in PD patients. The majority of studies have documented age-related decreases in total brain GSH in cingulate, frontal, occipital and other regions across the life span (Detcheverry et al., 2023). The small sample of subjects and potential regional differences may have contributed to variability in the findings. The brain is extremely vulnerable to mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS overproduction, and antioxidants such as glutathione neutralize excess ROS to maintain metabolic homeostasis (Dwivedi et al., 2020). High concentrations of iron are toxic to the cell by generating ROS, which underlies the relationship between susceptibility values and GSH in HCs. Under pathological conditions, in addition to the potentiation of iron to decrease GSH, glutamate neurotoxicity and neuroinflammation induce aberrations in the production and release of GSH (Bj ø rklund et al., 2021), which somewhat disrupts the relationship between iron deposition and GSH depletion. Furthermore, we observed a trans -synaptic  correspondence  between  midbrain  GABA  and  left striatal  GSH  levels  in  HCs,  a  relationship  that  was  absent  in  PD. Disruption  of  this  relationship  may  indicate  dysregulation  of  the nigrostriatal pathway and excess oxidative stress driven by upstream neurotransmitter imbalances.

Several limitations in the present study need to be acknowledged. Firstly, all PD patients were scanned in the OFF status to avoid confounding metabolic effects of anti-parkinsonian medications. Although there were no associations between metabolic measures and LEDD in our study and small-sample studies indicated no effect of medication on GABA + , Glx, creatine, NAA, or choline values in PD (van Nuland et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2024), future study of enough PD patients allowing subgroups according to medication status would be instructive to clarify the effects of medications on the neurometabolites. Secondly, the volume of interest (VOI) covered multiple regions, such as bilateral SN, RN and pons in the midbrain VOI and left CAU, PUT and GP in the left striatum VOI, necessarily to enhance the signal-to-noise ratio in MEGAPRESS sequences at 3 T. The larger VOI limits the specificity of metabolite  quantification  to  individual  anatomical  structures,  complicating the  interpretation  of  relationships  between  metabolites  and  other disease-related changes. Thirdly, we chose the left striatum as the VOI, a decision based on handedness (all subjects are right-handed). Analyzing the asymmetry of metabolite alterations in the striatum by considering the laterality of the predominantly affected side in PD is what we will do in our subsequent investigations. While both GSH and GABA have been implicated  in  PD,  their  lack  of  association  with  disease  severity  and motor  symptoms  in  our  study  may  highlight  the  need  for  further research into their role in non-motor symptoms, such as cognitive and psychiatric  dysfunction  in  PD.  Most  importantly,  since  water-  or  Crreferenced  metabolites  might  introduce  additional  confounding  factors, using an external phantom as a reference to validate our findings is warranted.

## 5. Conclusion

In summary, this comprehensive quantitative assessment revealed dysregulated  neurotransmitter  balance,  elevated  oxidative  stress  and iron  deposition  within  the  mesostriatal  circuits  in  PD,  specifically marked by decreased GABA levels in the midbrain, GSH depletion in the left  striatum  and concomitant subcortical susceptibility increase. The observed interactions between GABA levels, GSH levels, and susceptibility values in the healthy aging were disrupted in PD. These findings offer valuable insights into the pathophysiology of PD and may inform future  therapeutic  strategies  targeting  metabolic  and  oxidative  stress pathways.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

Su  Yan: Writing -original  draft,  Visualization,  Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. Bingfang Duan: Resources, Investigation, Data curation. Yuanhao Li: Visualization, Methodology, Investigation. Hongquan Zhu: Visualization,  Formal  analysis. Zhaoqi  Shi: Software, Resources. Xiaoxiao Zhang: Validation, Software. Yuanyuan Qin: Writing -review &amp; editing, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology. Wenzhen Zhu: Writing -review &amp; editing, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition.

## Funding

This study was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFC2406903) and Regional Innovation and Development Joint Fund of National Natural Science Foundation of China (U22A20354).

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.nicl.2025.103740.

## Data availability

Data will be made available on request.

## Table 1

| 0                        | 1               | 2            | 3         |
|:-------------------------|:----------------|:-------------|:----------|
| Age (years)              | 59.43 ± 7.37    | 57.11 ± 6.85 | 0.098 a   |
| Sex (male/female)        | 24/36           | 18/29        | 0.858 b   |
| Disease duration (years) | 3.0 (1.0 - 4.0) |              |           |
| Hoehn-Yahr stage         | 2.5 (1.5 - 2.5) |              |           |
| MDS-UPDRSIII             | 32 (18 - 45)    |              |           |
| LEDD (mg)                | 475 (350 - 700) |              |           |
| MMSE                     | 27 (25 - 29)    | 28 (27 - 29) | 0.005 c   |
| PSQI                     | 7.5 (5 - 12.5)  | 4 (3 - 9)    | 0.003 c   |
| RBDQ-HK                  | 10.5 (5 - 22)   | 5 (3 - 7)    | < 0.001 c |

## Table 2

| 0                       | 1              | 2              | 3      |     4 |
|:------------------------|:---------------|:---------------|:-------|------:|
| Midbrain level          | N = 49         | N = 38         |        |       |
| GABA + /Cr              | 0.127 ± 0.031  | 0.140 ± 0.028  | 0.034* | 0.136 |
| GABA + _FitError_Cr (%) | 11.250 ± 2.987 | 10.551 ± 3.634 | 0.328  |       |
| Glx/Cr                  | 0.067 ± 0.027  | 0.063 ± 0.026  | 0.317  | 0.634 |
| Glx_FitError_Cr (%)     | 14.352 ± 4.064 | 14.659 ± 4.074 | 0.728  |       |
| NAA/Cr                  | 1.985 ± 0.223  | 1.973 ± 0.168  | 0.782  | 0.782 |
| Cho/Cr                  | 0.515 ± 0.070  | 0.509 ± 0.046  | 0.613  | 0.782 |
| FWHM Cr (Hz)            | 9.194 ± 1.266  | 9.397 ± 0.915  | 0.406  |       |
| GM fraction             | 0.041 ± 0.014  | 0.038 ± 0.010  | 0.432  |       |
| WM fraction             | 0.909 ± 0.032  | 0.914 ± 0.017  | 0.308  |       |
| CSF fraction            | 0.051 ± 0.021  | 0.047 ± 0.011  | 0.318  |       |
| Striatum level          | N = 53         | N = 41         |        |       |
| GSH/Cr                  | 0.066 ± 0.022  | 0.089 ± 0.053  | 0.032* | 0.096 |
| GSH_FitError_Cr (%)     | 11.320 ± 2.405 | 10.736 ± 2.779 | 0.278  |       |
| NAA/Cr                  | 1.749 ± 0.188  | 1.802 ± 0.149  | 0.145  | 0.145 |
| Cho/Cr                  | 0.392 ± 0.043  | 0.380 ± 0.031  | 0.118  | 0.145 |
| FWHM Cr (Hz)            | 8.375 ± 0.659  | 8.393 ± 0.722  | 0.904  |       |
| GM fraction             | 0.484 ± 0.036  | 0.483 ± 0.032  | 0.908  |       |
| WM fraction             | 0.441 ± 0.043  | 0.463 ± 0.040  | 0.012* |       |
| CSF fraction            | 0.075 ± 0.040  | 0.054 ± 0.023  | 0.001* |       |

## Table 3

| 0    |     1 |     2 |     3 | 4      |
|:-----|------:|------:|------:|:-------|
| GABA | 0.194 | 0.218 | 0.492 | 0.004* |
| Glx  | 0.154 | 0.331 | 0.061 | 0.704  |
| E/I  | 0.262 | 0.093 | 0.169 | 0.354  |