Extended Data Fig. 1: Loss of PARK7 leads to a decrease of fat mass during HFHS diet. Quantification of epididymal ( a ) and inguinal ( b ) white adipose tissues (WAT), heart ( c ), liver ( d ), and the kidneys ( e ) from WT and Park7 KO mice on HFHS diet, as well as gastrocnemius ( f ), lean mass ( g ) and fat mass ( h ) on chow diet. Whiskers show min to max, boxes represent lower and higher quartiles, and middle line as median ( n = 6) and were analyzed using unpaired t-test. *** p ≤ 0.001, n.s. not significant.

Extended Data Fig. 2: Metabolic phenotyping of PARK7 knockout mice on HFHS diet. Measurements of ( a ) glucose tolerance and basal 6h-fasted glucose levels, ( b ) daily food intake, ( c ) locomotor activity, ( d ) energy expenditure, and ( e ) respiratory exchange ratio ( RER ) from WT and Park7 KO mice fed a HFHS diet. Data refer to mean ± SEM, or whiskers showing min to max and boxes showing lower and higher quartiles and middle line as median ( n = 5-6 per group) and were analyzed using unpaired t-test or two-way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons test; n.s. not significant.

Extended Data Fig. 3: Mitochondrial bioenergetics and glycolytic metabolism are preserved in C2C12 myotubes upon Park7 loss-offunction . ( a ) PARK7 abundance in whole cell lysates from C2C12 myotubes infected with single hairpin (sh)-RNAs targeting either empty vector (pLKO) or Park7 (shPark7 ).  Actin  is  used  as  a  loading  control.  ( b )  oxygen  consumption  rate  (OCR)  average  traces  ( left )  and  quantification ( right ) in control (pLKO) and shPark7 C2C12 myotubes (n= 15) in presence of 25 mM glucose/2 mM Glutamine/1 mM Pyruvate after injection of oligomycin (Oligo, 1.5 μM), CCCP (1.5 μM), and antimycin A/rotenone (AA/Rot, 4 μM/2 μM). ( c ) Average traces ( left ) and quantification ( right ) of extracellular acidification rate (ECAR) in control (pLKO) and shPark7 C2C12 myotubes (n= 15) in presence of 2 mM Glutamine after addition of glucose (10 mM), oligomycin (Oligo, 1.5 μM), 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG, 100 mM) and antimycin A/rotenone (AA/Rot, 4 μM/2 μM). Glyco. cap. , glycolytic capacity. Data refer to mean ± SEM or whiskers showing min to max and boxes showing lower and higher quartiles and middle line as median. Data were analyzed using multiple unpaired t-test with Holm-Sídák multiple comparisons test; n.s. , not significant.

Extended  Data  Fig.  4:  Mitochondrial  bioenergetics  are  also  preserved  in  gastrocnemius  muscle  of Park7 KO  mice. ( a )  BN-PAGE analysis of respiratory chain complex I, II, III, IV and V level and assembly in mitochondria isolated from gastrocnemius muscles of WT and Park7 KO mice (n= 6). ( b ) Average traces ( left ) and quantification ( right ) of oxygen consumption rate (OCR) by crude mitochondria isolated from gastrocnemius muscles of WT and Park7 KO mice (n= 6) in presence of substrates specific for respiratory chain complex I (10 mM pyruvate/2 mM malate) or ( c )  beta-oxidation  (25  uM  palmitoylcarnitine/2  mM  malate).  Substrate-dependent  respiration  (State  2),  maximal  mitochondrial respiration  (State  3),  resting  respiration  (State  4o),  and  uncoupled  respiration  (State  3u)  are  measured  in  response  to  4  mM  adenosine diphosphate  (ADP),  1.5 uM oligomycin  (Oligo),  and  15 uM CCCP, respectively.  Nonmitochondrial  respiration  is  measured  upon  inhibition  of oxidative phosphorylation by 4 μM antimycin A/2 μM rotenone (AA/Rot). ( d,e )  Horseradish peroxidase (HPR)-based quantification of reactive oxygen species produced by mitochondria isolated from gastrocnemius muscles of WT and Park7 KO mice (n = 6) in response to either DMSO (vehicle) or 2 μM rotenone. RFU , relative fluorescence intensity; Data refer to mean ± SEM and were analyzed using 2way ANOVA with Sídák's multiple comparisons test ( b,c ) or two-way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons test ( d,e ); * p ≤ 0.05; n.s. , not significant.

Extended  Data  Fig.  5: Park7 is  highly  expressed  in  mouse  skeletal  muscles.  (a) Median  normalized  expression  of Park7 mRNA (Transcripts Per Million, TPM) in mouse tissues (data from http://www.proteomicsdb.org). ( b )  Relative PARK7 protein abundance and PARK7 mRNA expression (log 2 normalized; Transcripts Per Million, TPM) in human tissues 25 .

Extended Data Fig. 6: PARK7-deficiency results in profound alteration s of protein and amino acid metabolism, redox homeostasis, and advanced glycation  end  products. ( a )  Principal  component  analysis  of  untargeted  metabolomics  data  generated  by  reversed phase-ultrahigh-performance  liquid  chromatography-tandem  mass  spectrometry  (RP-UHPLC-MS/MS)  of  gastrocnemius  muscles  from  WT and  KO  mice  on

HFHS diet.  ( b ) Heatmap of 97 metabolites selected by random forest and shown for individual samples. ( c ) Distribution of selected metabolites in  metabolic  classes.  Metabolite  differences  largely  reflected  protein  degradation  ( d ),  altered  redox  environment  ( e ),  ROS-scavenging  sialic acids ( f ), arginine ( g ) and lysine metabolites ( h ), and glycative stress ( i ). Whiskers show min to max, boxes represent lower and higher quartiles, and middle line is median. Data were analyzed using multiple unpaired t-test with Holm-Sídák multiple comparisons test or unpaired t-test; **** p ≤ 0.0001, *** p ≤ 0.001, ** p ≤ 0.01, * p ≤ 0.05, n.s. not significant.

Extended Data Fig. 7: Structural confirmation of  the  new  glycerinyl-AGEs. ( a )  Volcano  plot comparing metabolomes of gastrocnemius from WT and KO mice under chow diet. ( b ) Structural verification with commercially synthesized authentic standards N-α-glycerinylarginine (αGR) and N-α-glycerinyllysine (α-GK). ( c ) Confirmation  of  structures  by  comparison  with D-glucose13 C 6 isotopically labeled N-αglycerinylarginine (α-GR) and commercially synthesized Ne -glycerinyllysine ( e -GK).