## RESEARCH

## Open Access

## Evidence of brain target engagement in Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis by the investigational nanomedicine, CNMAu8, in the REPAIR phase 2 clinical trials

Jimin Ren 1 , Richard B. Dewey III 1,2 , Austin Rynders 3 , Jacob Evan 3 , Jeremy Evan 3 , Shelia Ligozio 4 , Karen S. Ho 3* , Peter V. Sguigna 1 , Robert Glanzman 3 , Michael T. Hotchkin 3 , Richard B. Dewey Jr. 1,2 and Benjamin M. Greenberg 1

## Abstract

Background Impaired brain energy metabolism has been observed in many neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD) and multiple sclerosis (MS). In both diseases, mitochondrial dysfunction and energetic impairment can lead to neuronal dysfunction and death. CNM-Au8® is a suspension of faceted, clean-surfaced gold nanocrystals that catalytically improves energetic metabolism in CNS cells, supporting neuroprotection and remyelination as demonstrated in multiple independent preclinical models. The objective of the Phase 2 REPAIR-MS and REPAIR-PD clinical trials was to investigate the effects of CNM-Au8, administered orally once daily for twelve or more weeks, on brain phosphorous-containing energy metabolite levels in participants with diagnoses of relapsing MS or idiopathic PD, respectively.

Results Brain metabolites were measured using 7-Tesla 31 P-MRS in two disease cohorts, 11 participants with stable relapsing MS and 13 participants with PD (n = 24 evaluable post-baseline scans). Compared to pre-treatment baseline, the mean NAD + /NADH ratio in the brain, a measure of energetic capacity, was significantly increased by 10.4% after 12 + weeks of treatment with CNM-Au8 (0.584 units, SD: 1.3; p =  0.037, paired t-test) in prespecified analyses of the combined treatment cohorts. Each disease cohort concordantly demonstrated increases in the NAD + /NADH ratio but did not reach significance individually ( p =  0.11 and p =  0.14, PD and MS cohorts, respectively). Significant treatment effects were also observed for secondary and exploratory imaging outcomes, including β-ATP and phosphorylation potential across both cohorts.

Conclusions Our results demonstrate brain target engagement of CNM-Au8 as a direct modulator of brain energy metabolism, and support the further investigation of CNM-Au8 as a potential disease modifying drug for PD and MS.

Keywords Catalytic gold nanotherapeutic, Target engagement, Drug development, Parkinson's Disease, Multiple sclerosis, Neuroimaging, Brain energy metabolites, Magnetic resonance spectroscopy

*Correspondence:

Karen S. Ho karen@clene.com

1 University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Neurology, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390, USA

3 Clene Nanomedicine, Inc., 6550 S Millrock Dr., Suite G50, Salt Lake City, UT 84121, USA

4 Instat Clinical Research, A Veristat Company, 1 Wilson St., Chatham, NJ 07928, USA

© The Author(s) 2023, corrected publication 2023. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons. org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

## Background

Brain  function  is  critically  dependent  on  a  continuous supply of chemical energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Advanced age, a known risk factor for most neurodegenerative diseases, is associated with compromised energy metabolism, such as decreased glucose uptake  and  decreased  mitochondrial  electron  transport chain  activity,  leading  to  lower  ATP  availability  in  the brain. These metabolic impairments are compounded in neurodegenerative  disease,  and  are  often  detectable  in advance of clinical symptom onset [1-3]. In neurodegenerative disease, a vicious cycle occurs in which energetic deficits  exacerbate  oxidative,  proteostatic,  and  neuroinflammatory stressors, which in turn lead to further energetic impairment and neurodegeneration [1, 4].

Measurement of brain energy metabolites, in particular  nicotinamide  adenine  dinucleotide  (oxidized  form: NAD + ,  reduced  form:  NADH),  and  ATP,  have  revealed important  insights  into  the  energetic  deficits  in  neurodegenerative  disease.  Not  only  do  NAD + and  NADH comprise  the  essential  redox  couple  for  major  cellular ATP-generating reactions, namely oxidative phosphorylation and glycolysis, but they also serve as key intracellular energy sensors that coordinate nutrient availability and cellular energy status with ATP production [5]. The NAD + /NADH ratio  is  regarded  as  a  measure  of  global brain energy capacity because the activities of many ratelimiting enzymes involved in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, ketone  production,  and  glycolysis  are  regulated  by  this ratio [6-8].

Detection  of  changes  in  the  NAD + /NADH  ratio  as well  as  other  critical  phosphorous-containing  energy metabolites  has  been  quantified  using 31 Phosphorous magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( 31 P-MRS) imaging in living  organisms,  including  humans. 31 P-MRS  imaging has  consistently  demonstrated  brain  energetic  impairments  in  individuals  with  PD  or  with  MS  [3,  9-14]. Importantly,  restoration  of  NAD + levels  was  associated  with  a  correction  of  energetic  and  mitochondrial deficits  in  PD-patient  derived  induced  pluripotent  stem cell  (iPSC)  dopaminergic  neurons,  and  was  associated with  improved  dopaminergic  (DA)  neuron  survival  and improved  motor  behavior  in  a  PD  animal  model  [15]. In  multiple  sclerosis  (MS),  we  have  demonstrated  that treatment  of  two  independent  animal  models  of  demyelination  with  orally  delivered  CNM-Au8,  which  raises intracellular NAD + levels in target oligodendrocyte cells [16],  markedly enhanced remyelination in both the corpus callosum and spinal cord lesions [17]. This remyelination  was  demonstrated  to  favorably  impact  function, as  recovery  of  behavioral  phenotypes  in  the  cuprizone mouse model were observed with CNM-Au8 treatment [17]. These results, along with similar results from other independent studies, indicate that NAD metabolism is an important therapeutic target for both MS and PD [9, 18, 19].

CNM-Au8 is an orally-administered, concentrated suspension of clean-surfaced catalytically-active gold nanocrystals,  whose  surfaces  catalyze  the  rapid  oxidation  of NADH to NAD + ,  increasing the intracellular availability of  both  NAD + and  ATP  in  in  vitro  studies  [16,  17].  In multiple preclinical studies, CNM-Au8 has not only been shown to restore energetic homeostasis, but also reduce oxidative  stress  via  superoxide  dismutase-like  and  catalase-like activity. CNM-Au8 is blood-brain barrier penetrant and cell membrane-permeant. While nanoparticles of  gold  have  been  shown  to  have  the  capacity  to  act  as biological catalysts [20, 21], to our knowledge, CNM-Au8 is  the  only  suspension  of  gold  nanocrystals  with  both exceptionally high catalytic activity and very low toxicity that is being developed as a disease-modifying agent for neurodegenerative disease. Preclinical efficacy studies in multiple in vitro and in vivo models have demonstrated CNM-Au8 enables remyelination of demyelinated axons and enhances the survival of a variety of neuronal subtypes  in  several  neurodegenerative  disease  models  [16, 17].

31 Phosphorous magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( 31 P-MRS)  allows  for  the  non-invasive  assessment  of phosphorous-containing  energy  metabolites,  including ATP,  of  the  whole  brain  in  vivo.  Ultrahigh-field  scanners at 7 Tesla provide a substantial signal-to-noise gain, shortened  (T1)  relaxation  time,  and  improved  spectral resolution of phosphorous metabolites [3, 22] compared to  lower  strength  scanners.  Using 31 P-MRS,  brain  levels of key energy metabolites such as ATP, total nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [NAD(H)], phosphocreatine (PCr),  inorganic  phosphate  (Pi),  phospholipid  monoester  metabolites  phosphocholine  (PC)  and  phosphoethanolamine (PE), phospholipid diester metabolites glycerophosphocholine (GPC) and glycerophosphoethanolamine  (GPE),  and  the  nucleotide  sugar,  uridine diphosphate glucose (UDPG), can be measured. Separation of the NAD(H) signals into the reduced (NADH) and oxidized  (NAD + )  forms  is  technically  challenging,  but with 7T scanners, spectral editing techniques allow measurement of each metabolite as well as the NAD + /NADH ratio [23, 24].

The objective of the REPAIR clinical trial program was to demonstrate the effects of CNM-Au8 on brain energy metabolites  (i.e.,  CNS  target  engagement)  and  evaluate safety in two sister studies that enrolled participants with either  multiple  sclerosis  (REPAIR-MS,  NCT03993171), or Parkinson's disease (REPAIR-PD, NCT03815916). Brain energy metabolites were quantified using 7T 31 P-MRS at baseline,  before  the  start  of  treatment,  and after  12  or  more weeks of daily oral dosing with 15 mg or  30  mg  CNM-Au8.  End  of  treatment  results  at  week

12  were  compared  to  pre-treatment  baseline  in  24  participants  with  evaluable  post-baseline  scans,  consisting of 13 participants from REPAIR-PD, and 11 participants from  REPAIR-MS.  The  REPAIR-MS  protocol  incorporated a 6-week drug withdrawal period that followed the 12-week dosing period. Nine participants in the REPAIRMS trial had a final 31 P-MRS scan performed after completing  the  6-week  drug  withdrawal  period,  allowing a  comparison of brain energy metabolite levels after 12 weeks of continuous dosing to metabolite levels following drug withdrawal.

## Methods

## Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient consents

Study  protocols  were  reviewed  and  approved  by  the Institutional  Review  Board  of  the  University  of  Texas Southwestern  Medical  Center  and  were  conducted  in accordance  with  Good  Clinical  Practice  Guidelines  of the International Conference on Harmonization and the ethical principles of the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000 [25]. REPAIR-PD was registered on clinicaltrials.gov with registration number NCT03815916 and REPAIR-MS  with  registration  number  NCT03993171 prior to the enrollment of the first participants for each trial.  All  participants  provided  written  consent  prior  to participating in the study.

## Participant selection

Detailed inclusion/exclusion criteria are given in Tables S1 (REPAIR-PD) and S2 (REPAIR-MS). Key entry criteria for each REPAIR cohort are provided below.

REPAIR-PD:  Participants  were  men  or  women  aged 30-80 years old with a diagnosis of PD according to the MDS  Clinical  Diagnostic  Criteria  for  Parkinson's  disease  [26].  Additionally,  participants  were  Hoehn  and Yahr stage ≤ 3, had PD disease duration of ≤ 3 years, and were  currently  undergoing  treatment  with  dopaminergic medications for at least 12 weeks with no change in the dose for at least 6 weeks prior to enrollment. Exclusion  criteria  included  Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment (MoCA) &lt; 18,  unstable  medical  conditions,  HIV,  hepatitis  B  or  C,  clinically significant abnormalities on labs or electrocardiogram (ECG), current participation in other investigational  drug  studies,  positive  urine  screen  for drugs  of  abuse  or  alcohol  abuse,  individuals  unable  or unwilling to use acceptable forms of birth control during and for 6 months after completion of participation, positive pregnancy test, history of allergy to gold in any form, or deemed to be at risk for suicide.

REPAIR-MS:  Participants  were  men  or  women  aged 18-55 years old with a diagnosis of relapsing MS according  to  the  revised  McDonald  Criteria  [27],  within  15 years of diagnosis at the time of screening. Additionally, participants were receiving stable treatment with natalizumab, defined as a stable dose maintained at the standard  infusion  interval  of  28-days  ( ± 5  days)  for  at  least the prior six months, and were exhibiting stable disease activity  based  on  the  investigators'  judgment  over  the prior three months. Exclusion criteria included a clinical relapse  requiring  systemic  steroid  treatment  within  the prior three months, current treatment with any MS therapy other than natalizumab, any active ophthalmological cause for retinal damage other than MS, any ophthalmic disease or severe refractive defects that might confound the study results or optical coherence tomography assessment, unstable medical conditions, HIV, hepatitis B or C, clinically  significant  abnormalities  on  labs  or  ECG,  current  participation  in  other  investigational  drug  studies, positive urine screen for drugs of abuse or alcohol abuse, individuals unable or unwilling to use acceptable forms of birth control during and for 6 months after completion of participation,  positive  pregnancy  test,  history  of  allergy to gold in any form, or deemed to be at risk for suicide.

## Trial design

REPAIR-PD  and  REPAIR-MS  were  developed  as  joint proof-of-concept  studies  to  assess  the  CNS  metabolic effects and safety of CNM-Au8 in participants diagnosed with  either  Parkinson's  disease  or  relapsing  MS.  Both studies were carried out by investigators at the University of  Texas  Southwestern  Medical  Center  (UT  Southwestern) who were, along with participants and all staff at the study site, blinded to CNM-Au8 dose level.

Participants  with  early,  stable  PD  (i.e.,  not  requiring dose  adjustments  to  any  dopaminergic  medication  during the study) were enrolled in REPAIR-PD. Participants with a diagnosis of stable  relapsing  MS  within  15  years of  screening  were  enrolled  in  REPAIR-MS.  Participants were required to maintain the same the dose of any background  therapy  (e.g.,  natalizumab,  symptomatic  dopaminergic drugs) throughout the studies. All participants received CNM-Au8 in a volume of 120 mL, dispensed in two single-dose 60 mL food-grade high density polyethylene containers, with the instructions to drink both 60 mL bottles each morning on an empty stomach.

Participants were followed over 12 consecutive weeks during  which  study  visits  were  conducted  at  2-4  week intervals. A phone assessment was conducted at Week 2 to  determine safety and tolerability.  At  Weeks  4,  8,  and 12,  clinical  visits  were  conducted  for  pharmacokinetics (PK),  pharmacodynamics  (PD)  biofluid  sampling,  and safety assessments with additional clinical assessments to evaluate secondary outcomes, described below.

31 P-MRS  scans  were  performed  prior  to  initiation  of treatment at the baseline visit and at end of study, which was  scheduled  to  occur  at  week  12.  A  third  scan  was

performed on participants in the REPAIR-MS trial after 6 weeks of drug withdrawal (from Week 12 to Week 18).

Beginning  with  the  baseline  visit,  participants  had ECG,  safety  labs,  concomitant  medication  assessments, physical exams, treatment emergent adverse event assessments, scoring of Movement Disorder Society-Sponsored Revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) for participants with PD and scoring of Expanded Disability Rating Scale (EDSS) for participants with MS, patient global impression of change and severity (PGI-C, PGI-S), clinician global impression of change and severity (CGI-C, CGI-S), and the Columbia suicide severity rating scale (C-SSRS) assessments performed at each visit until completion of their participation. For the time-and-event schedules for REPAIR-PD and REPAIRMS, please see Supplemental Tables S3 and S4, respectively.  MedDRA  Version  22.0  was  used  for  treatment emergent adverse event reporting.

## Interventions

Participants  took  the  assigned  dose  of  CNM-Au8  once daily  for  at  least  12  weeks.  Study  investigators  and  participants were blinded to the dose of CNM-Au8 selected by the sponsor, which could range from 7.5 mg to 60 mg CNM-Au8;  the  blind  will  be  maintained  until  another companion cohort of the REPAIR-MS trial in non-active progressive multiple sclerosis, which is currently underway, is completed.

## Protocol deviation due to Covid-19

Due to administrative suspension of in-person research visits  at  UT  Southwestern  in  the  Spring  of  2020  during the COVID-19  pandemic,  several  patients  continued  treatment  with  the  study  drug  for  longer  than the  originally  planned  12  weeks.  Some  study  visit  data that  required  an  in-person  visit  was  missing  due  to  the COVID-19  related  research  suspension,  but  all  participants  had  baseline  and  end-of-study  primary  and secondary outcome imaging assessments performed per  protocol  once  in-person  imaging  was  allowed.  The end-of-study imaging assessment was performed 12-16 weeks  post-baseline  for  all  but  two  participants,  one in  REPAIR-PD  (end-of-study  imaging  performed  at  25 weeks)  and  one  in  REPAIR-MS  (end-of-study  imaging performed at 20 weeks).

## Imaging protocol and data processing

31 P-MRS scans were performed at the baseline and Week 12  visits.  Because  some  Week  12 31 P-MRS  scans  were delayed  due  to  COVID-19  related  research  restrictions, they were considered as the Week 12 end of study imaging scan, irrespective of the actual timing.

For all scans, participants were positioned headfirst  and  supine  in  a  human  7T  MRI  scanner  (Achieva,

Philips  Healthcare,  Best,  The  Netherlands),  operated at  120.6  MHz  for 31 P  resonance,  and  located  at  the Advanced  Imaging  Research  Center,  UT  Southwestern. The  back  of  the  head  was  positioned  in  the  center  of the  detection  radiofrequency  (RF)  coils  (see  below  for details).  Cushioned  pads  provided  comfort  and  helped to secure the positioning of the head to reduce potential movement throughout the collection of data. Participants were reminded to remain awake during the collection of the 31 P-MRS scan and with patient consent, body weights were added as needed to reduce body movement.

A  half-cylinder-shaped 1 H/ 31 P  dual-tuned  T/R  partial volume  RF  coil  (Philips  Healthcare,  Best,  The  Netherlands)  was  used  to  image  the  posterior  brain  (occipital and parietal lobes) for evaluation of the brain redox state based on the measurement of NAD + /NADH ratio. Axial and sagittal T2-weighted spin-echo multi-slice  MRI images were collected from the posterior head for planning  volume-based  shimming.  Typical 31 P-MRS  data acquisition parameters were utilized including TR 1.0 s, a  hard readout pulse at B 1 59  µT  with minimum TD of 0.17 ms, NP 4k and zero filled to 8k, and BW 8 kHz. Data were accumulated in NA blocks of 256 or 512 and later summed, upon aligning at the reference PCr 31 P signal, to yield a reference spectrum. Despite the dispersing power of  ultrahigh  field  7T,  the  conventional  pulse-acquire sequence  fails  to  deliver  a  brain 31 P  spectrum  with  a clearly  resolved  NAD  signal  due  to  overlapping  from

The 3D 31 P MRSI data were acquired from the whole brain  using  a 31 P  transmit-receive  (T/R)  bird-cage  volume RF coil of diameter 23 cm and length 10 cm (Gorter Center,  Leiden  University  Medical  Center,  The  Netherlands). The 31 P coil was inserted into a single-channel bird-cage  quadrature 1 H  T/R  head  coil  (Nova  Medical, Wilmington, MA, USA) for 1 H-based B0 shimming (by the second-order pencil-beam projection method). After an  initial  scout  image  scan,  multi-slice  MPRAGE  MRI images  were  collected  for  planning  the  shimming  box and  the  MRSI  data  acquisition  matrix.  The  shimming quality  was  checked  by  a  non-localized 31 P  spectrum pulse acquired with the following parameters: TR 1.0 s, number of sampling points (NP) 4 k, effective excitation bandwidth  3.2  kHz,  spectral  bandwidth  (BW)  8  kHz, number of acquisitions (NA) = 80. The 3D 31 P MRSI data were acquired using a block pulse, at TR 0.5 s, flip angle 55 o ,  in-plane resolution 2 × 2  cm 2 ,  reconstructed to 1 × 1 cm 2 ,  slice  thickness 2 cm, k-space acquisition weighting (α = 1.7 and β = 1.0), elliptic k-space sampling, 4k sampling points  zero-filled  to  8k  prior  to  Fourier  transformation, typical coronal imaging FOV (FH × RL × AP) = 10 × 16 × 16 cm 3 (with phase encoding steps 5 × 8 × 8), and NA = 24. A non-localized whole-brain scan was also performed with a pulse-acquire sequence at TR = 0.52 s and NA = 160 for checking spectral quality.

the  α-ATP  signal,  which  is  several-fold  larger,  broadbased, and typically asymmetrical in lineshape. To obtain 31 P  MRS  spectra  with  resolved  NAD  from  overlapping α-ATP signals by spectral editing, an additional 31 P MRS spectrum was acquired using an inversion-recovery (IR) sequence  with  the  same  TR  and  TD  but  contained  an adiabatic  inversion  pre-pulse  followed  by  a  short  delay of  0.37  to  selectively  nullify  the  NAD  signal.  The  resultant standalone α-ATP signal with well-defined spectral baseline in the IR spectrum was then utilized to remove the overlapping α-ATP signal from the reference spectra for obtaining the resolved NAD signal. Given that UDPG and its  structural  analogues  also  contribute  a  set  of 31 P signals in the upfield of α-ATP, their spectral effect on the NAD signal was also corrected prior to the deconvolution of NAD into NAD + and NADH as described previously  [24,  28].  For  quantitative  comparison  of  different metabolites  in  the  posterior  brain  region,  an  additional scan was performed, using the partial volume coil, under the fully relaxed condition with a long TR of 15 s at a flip angle of 55 o .

The  time-domain 31 P  FID  data  were  post-processed (zero-filling,  apodization,  Fourier  transformation,  and zero- and first-order phasing) using the scanner software (SpectroView,  Philips  Healthcare).  The  first  three  sampling  points  were  discarded  to  remove  the  broad  background  phospholipid  signal.  The  frequency-domain 31 P spectra  were  analyzed  by  quantification  of  metabolite 31 P signals using an in-house program written in MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). Peak area for each metabolite was normalized to the PCr peak area. Priorknowledge about chemical shift and J-coupling constant of  NAD + and  NADH were used as initial  values  in  the lineshape  fitting  [24].  Normalized 31 P  signal  intensity ratios were obtained for each metabolite in reference to PCr for both REPAIR cohorts at each time point, and the entire data analysis was blinded to the operators. Mean levels  of  each  metabolite at the end of study (Week 12) visit  were compared to the respective baseline value for each subject. Comparative  analyses  were  performed separately for data collected using the partial volume coil and data collected using the whole brain coil.

## 31 P-MRS imaging outcome measures

The primary outcome was mean change from baseline to end-of-study  visit  for  the  NAD + :NADH  ratio.  Secondary  endpoints  included  the  mean  change  from  baseline to the end of study visit in the fraction (%) of NAD + of total  NAD peak area, and in the fraction (%) of NADH of total NAD peak area. Mean change in NAD + /NADH ratio from Week 12 to Week 18 is also reported for the MS cohort.

Several bioenergetic metabolite exploratory outcomes, functional  exploratory  outcomes,  and  safety  outcomes were  also  evaluated.  Here,  we  report  the  regression  of baseline  values  versus  mean  percentage  change  of  the average brain β-ATP signal, which is regarded to reflect brain  ATP  levels  due  to  the  lack  of  overlap  with  overlapping phosphorous peaks [29]. Only the β-ATP signal arises from pure ATP, whereas the α-ATP peak includes small contributions from NAD + /NADH and α-ADP, and γ-ATP contains a contribution from β-ADP. Analyses of other phosphorous metabolites will be reported in a separate publication when data from the ongoing REPAIRMS (Cohort 2) trial can be evaluated coordinately with Cohort 1. REPAIR-MS (Cohort 2, NCT03993171) is currently  enrolling  participants  with  non-active  secondary progressive MS or primary progressive MS as a companion  study  to  REPAIR-MS  (Cohort  1)  for  relapsing  MS. Similarly,  functional  exploratory  outcomes  specific  to MS,  including  change  from  baseline  to  end-of-study  in the EDSS score and measures of low contrast letter acuity,  fine  and gross motor control, and cognition for MS, will  be  reported  in  a  separate  publication  along  with results from Cohort 1. Exploratory clinical outcomes for PD included change from baseline to end-of-study in the validated  clinical  rating  scale  MDS-UPDRS,  as  well  as measures of gait, balance, and motility for PD.

Safety was assessed via spontaneously reported adverse events,  serious  adverse  events,  discontinuations  due  to adverse events, deaths, and the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS).

## Statistical analysis

The  sample  size  for  this  proof-of-concept  study  was calculated  based  on  the  observed  variance  in  brain metabolite  levels  in  a  prior 31 P-MRS  study  involving  a cohort of 7 healthy volunteers in which repeat 31 P-MRS scans were taken two weeks apart [24]. The ratio of the NAD + /NADH  baseline  average  value  was  4.09 ± 0.78, while  the  repeat 31 P-MRS  assessment  was  4.11 ± 0.79. The  standard  deviation  of  the  difference  from  baseline  to  week  2  was  0.28  and  the  coefficient  of  variation was  5.8% ± 4.8%,  demonstrating  consistent 31 P-MRS NAD + /NADH  reproducibility. We  originally  hypothesized  a  mean  difference  from  baseline  to  end-of-study of 0.41 (10%) based on an average baseline NAD + :NADH redox  value  of  4.1,  and  an  estimated  standard  deviation for the difference from baseline of 0.42. Assuming a paired t-test, power of 80%, and a two-sided alpha of 0.05, this resulted in a sample size estimate of 11 participants, which was increased by two to a planned enrollment of 13 participants per cohort to account for possible dropouts.  While  the  REPAIR  studies  were  being  conducted, advances  in 31 P-MRS  imaging  techniques  by  Ren  et  al. improved  the  specificity  of  the  NAD + :NADH  measure [24] but also resulted in increased intra-participant variance, thereby increasing the required target sample size

Table 1 Baseline characteristics of participants in REPAIR-PD

(n = 13)

| Baseline Participant Demographics              | Baseline Participant Demographics   |
| Age (years)                                    | 65.9±7.8                            |
| Sex (% Male)                                   | 54%                                 |
| Race/ethnicity, non-Hispanic White (%)         | 92%                                 |
| Age at diagnosis (years)                       | 64.5±8.1                            |
| Time from diagnosis at enrollment (months)     | 17.2±8.8                            |
| MMSE                                           | 28.8±1.3                            |
| MDS UPDRS Part I                               | 4.8±3.4                             |
| MDS UPDRS Part II                              | 3.0±2.6                             |
| MDS UPDRS Part III                             | 20.5±8.1                            |
| MDS UPDRS Part IV                              | 1.0±1.5                             |
| MDS UPDRSTotal                                 | 29.4±9.3                            |
| Average Levodopa Dose (in IR equivalents, mg)  | 532±267                             |
| # of patients on Carbidopa/Levodopa only       | 9 (70%)                             |
| # of patients on MAO-B inhibitor (rasagiline)  | 3 (23%)                             |
| # of patients on dopamine agonist (ropinirole) | 1 (7.7%)                            |

Values given are mean ± standard deviation. Levodopa dose is calculated as (mg immediate-release levodopa) + (mg controlled-release levodopa tablets)0.75 + (mg extended-release capsules)0.7.

given  the  same  assumed  effect  size.  Due  to  COVID-19 related  challenges,  sample  sizes  for  the  respective  studies were not revised from the original plan. Instead, the statistical  analysis  plan  was  designed  to  include  a  prespecified  integrated  analysis  of  both  disease  cohorts  for the primary outcome assessment.

Paired t-tests were used to assess for change in NAD + :NADH ratio, NAD + fraction, and NADH faction, comparing  baseline  to  end-of-study.  Paired  t-test  was used to assess change in NAD + /NADH ratio from Week 12 to Week 16 in the MS cohort. Linear regression was used to assess participants' percent change from baseline to end-of-study ATP levels compared their baseline ATP levels,  as  well  as  for  participants'  percent  change  from baseline to end-of-study brain phosphorylation potential compared their baseline phosphorylation potential.

Paired  t-tests  were  also  calculated  for  each  individual gait or balance parameter reported by the APDM Mobility Lab Timed Up and Go (TUG), Walk, and Sway tests which  were  performed  at  baseline  and  on  the  end-ofstudy  visit.  Sidak's  correction  for  the  APDM  variables was employed to account for the large number of comparisons  resulting  in  a  significance  threshold  of  0.001. MDS-UPDRS  parts  1,  2,  and  4  were  analyzed  with ANOVA, while part 3 and total score was assessed using a  mixed-effects  model  to  account  for  the  missing  data caused by missed in-person visits related to the COVID19  research  suspension.  Statistical  analyses  were  performed  using  SAS  9.4  (SAS  Institute,  Inc.,  Cary,  NC). Figures  were  generated  in  Prism  9.4.1  (Graphpad  Software LLC, San Diego, CA).

Table 2 Baseline characteristics of participants in REPAIR-MS

(n = 11)

| Baseline Participant Demographics             | Baseline Participant Demographics   |
| Age (years)                                   | 41.6±10.0                           |
| BMI (kg/m 2 )                                 | 27.9±5.7                            |
| Sex (% Female)                                | 69%                                 |
| Race/ethnicity, non-Hispanic White (%)        | 85%                                 |
| Age at diagnosis (years)                      | 34.5±9.4                            |
| Time from symptom onset at enrollment (years) | 7.1±4.6                             |
| Time since last relapse (years)               | 4.5±3.2                             |
| %Treated with natalizumab                     | 100%                                |
| EDSS Score                                    | 2.7±1.9                             |

Values given are mean ± standard deviation.

## Results

## Participants

Demographics, participant disposition and baseline clinical features of the 13 participants in REPAIR-PD are shown in Table 1. Participants were enrolled in the study from October 2019 through November 2020, and the last participant completed the study in April 2021. All participants completed the baseline and end-of-study visit, and the overall adherence of participants based on consumed bottle counts was 97%.

Demographics,  participant  disposition  and  baseline clinical features of the 11 participants in REPAIR-MS are shown in Table 2. Participants were enrolled in the study from December 2019 through February 2021, and the last participant completed the study in July 2021. All participants completed the baseline and end-of-study visit, and the overall adherence of participants based on consumed bottle counts was 86%.

## Brain energy metabolites

The  results  for  the  prespecified  primary  endpoint,  the mean  change  in  the  brain  NAD + /NADH  ratio  across the two  cohorts  demonstrated  a  statistically significant  increase  by  an  average  of  0.589  ( + 10.4%)  following  12  weeks  of  treatment  with  CNM-Au8  ( p = 0.037, paired  t-test)  (Fig.  1a).  Key  secondary  endpoints,  mean change  from  baseline  in  the  NAD + and  NADH  fractions  of  the  total  NAD  pool,  were  concordant  with  the primary  endpoint,  in  that  the  NAD + fraction  increased ( p = 0.026) while the NADH fraction decreased ( p = 0.026) (Fig.  1b).  The  results  for  each  study  also  independently demonstrated  consistencies  supporting  an  increase  in the  NAD + /NADH  ratio,  with  results  of  0.386  ( + 6.8%, p = 0.108, paired t-test); and  0.83 ( + 14.3%, p = 0.145, paired  t-test)  for  REPAIR-PD  and  REPAIR-MS,  respectively, although neither cohort on its own demonstrated statistical significance.

The  REPAIR-MS  trial  protocol  included  a  6-week withdrawal  of  treatment  following  12  weeks  of  dosing.  After  withdrawal  of  CNM-Au8  treatment  from

NAD*/NADH Ratio

Wk12+ (End of Treatment)

% Change from Baseline

REPAIR Integrated Analysis

0.06- p= &lt;0.0001

REPAIR-MS

Percent Change in Phosphorylation Potential

Brain NAD*/NADH Ratio by Study Visit p = 0.591

p = &lt;0.0001

Fig. 1 Increased NAD + /NADH Brain Ratio in Both PD and MS Participants in the REPAIR Studies. (a-c) Pre-specified integrated analyses of REPAIR-MS and REPAIR-PD values of the primary endpoint, (a) change in brain NAD + /NADH ratio [mean change in ratio from baseline to end of study = 0.5891, + 10.4%, p =  0.0371 (paired t-test)], and secondary endpoints, (b) change in NAD + fraction and change in NADH fraction after 12 + weeks of daily dosing of CNMAu8 [mean change of NAD + fraction, 0.0093, + 1.1%, with a reciprocal change of NADH fraction, -0.0093, -1.1%; p =  0.0264 (paired t-test)]. (c) The REPAIRMS trial protocol included a 6-week withdrawal of treatment following 12 weeks of dosing. After withdrawal of treatment, at week 18, a final 31 P-MRS scan showed that NAD + /NADH ratio had returned to baseline levels. Bar graphs show mean ±95% CI; individual participant values at baseline (blue circles), end of study (green triangles), and 6 weeks post-treatment (black diamonds)

Fig. 2 ATP and Phosphorylation Potential Equilibration in REPAIR Clinical Trials. Pre-specified integrated analyses of REPAIR-MS and REPAIR-PD values of the exploratory endpoints, (a) Percent change in β-ATP from baseline to end-of-study and (b) Percent change in phosphorylation potential from baseline to end-of study, plotted against baseline values for β-ATP and phosphorylation potential, respectively. Individual values for REPAIR-PD participants (n = 13) are shown as light green triangles; individual values for REPAIR-MS participants are shown as dark green diamonds. Linear regression line (orange) and 95% CI (dashed curves) are shown

week 12 to week 18, the final 31 P-MRS scan showed that NAD + /NADH ratio had returned to baseline at Week 18 (Fig. 1c).

Analyses  of  prespecified  exploratory  endpoints  demonstrated  that  homeostatic  equilibrium  was  achieved for both adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and the phosphorylation  potential  index  [β-ATP/(ADP*Pi(in))], a  ratio  of  high  energy  to  low  energy  phosphates  [30] (Fig. 2). For this  metabolite  energy  index,  the  percent  change  from  baseline  to  week  12  was  significantly inversely correlated with baseline levels, such that participants with relatively lower baseline levels demonstrated

increases,  and  participants  with  relatively  higher  baseline levels demonstrated a re-balancing effect with levels equilibrating to the baseline population mean. This relationship was observed in both REPAIR-PD and REPAIRMS, and on an integrated basis across the two studies for: β-ATP (r 2 = 0.711, p &lt; 0.0001;  Fig.  2a),  and  phosphorylation potential (r 2 = 0.591, p &lt; 0.0001; Fig. 2b).

## Exploratory endpoints

MDS-UPDRS is a clinician-administered, validated instrument  for  measurement  of  both  non-motor  and motor  aspects  associated  with  PD  for  use  in  research and clinical trials [31]. The MDS-UPDRS is comprised of four parts: (i) non-motor experiences of daily living; (ii) motor  experiences  of  daily  living;  (iii)  motor  examination;  (iv)  motor  complications.  Analysis  of  variance  of the MDS-UPDRS parts revealed a statistically significant improvement in the part 2 score (Supplemental Fig. 1A) driven  mainly  by  a  significant  improvement  at  week  4 (mean part 2 score at baseline = 3.0, week 4 = 1.8, end-ofstudy = 3.2,  mean  difference = -1.2,  ANOVA  with  Dunnett's  correction, p = 0.03).  No  significant  change  was noted  in  the  MDS-UPDRS  total  score  (Supplemental Fig.  1B)  nor  in  any  other  part.  Dosage  of  dopaminergic drugs was held constant in all subjects during the study.

The APDM Mobility lab generated 32 unique parameters for the Sway test, 7 for the TUG test, and 51 for the Walk test. After Sidak correction, none of these demonstrated a statistically significant mean change from baseline to end of study.

## Safety

A total of 8 (61.5%) REPAIR-MS participants and 6 (46%) REPAIR-PD participants experienced at least one treatment emergent adverse  event  (TEAE).  All  TEAEs  were reported  as  mild  or  moderate;  no  participants  experienced TEAEs reported as severe. No participants experienced TEAEs that were considered related to study drug by the study investigators. There were no serious adverse events (SAEs), no TEAEs resulting in study discontinuation, and no deaths. TEAEs occurring in more than one participant across both disease cohorts included sinusitis (n = 3),  nasopharyngitis  (n = 3),  and  paresthesia  (n = 2). Other  safety  parameters  that  were  assessed  included hematology, serum chemistry, urinalysis, physical exam, electrocardiogram, and the CSSRS. CSSRS data revealed no  suicidal  ideation  from  any  participants  across  both studies. Of the laboratory assessments, only one clinically significant finding (elevated creatine kinase) was reported in the REPAIR-MS cohort for a participant at the baseline visit. The safety lab was collected prior to participant dosing with CNM-Au8 and was found to resolve within two weeks at this  participant's  next  visit,  while  treated  with CNM-Au8.  The  participant's  creatine  kinase  remained within the normal range throughout the remainder of the study.  In  conclusion,  CNM-Au8 was well-tolerated, and no safety signals were observed in either cohort.

## Discussion

The  objective  of  our  study  was  to  demonstrate  brain target  engagement  of  orally  administered  CNM-Au8 in participants with PD or MS using 7T 31 P-MRS. After 12 + weeks  of  daily  oral  dosing  of  CNM-Au8,  a  10.4% increase in brain NAD + /NADH ratio compared to baseline  was  observed  in  a  prespecified  integrated  analysis of  the  two  disease  cohorts.  This  statistically  significant observation  was  supported  by  an  end-of-study  increase in  NAD + levels  and  a  concomitant  decrease  in  NADH levels compared to baseline. When each PD or MS cohort was  analyzed  separately,  an  increase  in  NAD + /NADH ratio was consistently observed in each cohort, although these  increases  did  not  independently  reach  statistical significance,  likely  due  to  the  limited  sample  size.  The REPAIR-MS trial protocol included a 6-week withdrawal of treatment following 12 weeks of dosing. After 6-week withdrawal  of  CNM-Au8  treatment  from  week  12  to week 18, a final 31 P-MRS scan showed that NAD + /NADH ratio had returned to baseline pre-treatment levels. This result  indicated  that  CNM-Au8  dosed  daily  for  at  least 12-weeks increased brain NAD + /NADH ratio, an effect that ceased following withdrawal of CNM-Au8.

Limitations  of  our  study  include  the  relatively  small number of participants in the REPAIR trials. In addition, the studies had to be terminated after evaluating only one dose of CNM-Au8 due to enrollment challenges associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. While future studies with larger cohorts of participants using brain metabolite imaging to evaluate CNM-Au8 treatment effects are warranted,  there  were  several  important  observations  that these studies afforded, despite their small size.

A previous 31 P-MRS study demonstrated that the brain NAD + /NADH  ratio  decreases  approximately  0.5%  per decade in healthy individuals [23]. Based on this observation, the result of a 10.4% increase in NAD + /NADH ratio in  12-16  weeks  with  CNM-Au8  treatment  represents a  comparatively large treatment effect, one that may be sufficient  to  have  clinical  impact  on  energy  metabolicrelated  declines  in  neurodegenerative  disease.  To  our knowledge, CNM-Au8 is the only drug in development with  catalytic  activity  targeted  at  intracellular  NADH conversion  to  NAD + with  a  demonstrated,  potentially beneficial,  effect  on  these  metabolites  in  participants with neurodegenerative disease.

The  REPAIR  studies  also  extend  the  findings  of  the recent  NADPARK  study,  which  reported  that  elevating brain total NAD levels by dietary supplementation with a high-dose NAD precursor in 30 participants with PD for 30 days was associated with mild clinical improvement,

increased brain glucose metabolism, and decreased inflammatory  cytokines  in  serum  and  CSF  [32].  The study was limited by use of a 3T 31 P-MRS scanner that precluded measurement of the NAD + /NADH redox ratio in the study's participants. Because our study employed a 7T scanner we were able to demonstrate that CNM-Au8 treatment affected NAD at the granularity of increasing the  NAD + /NADH  ratio,  which  has  been  identified  as holding  ameliorative  potential  for  correcting  metabolic defects due to impaired mitochondrial electron transport chain activity beyond what is possible with NAD precursor supplementation [33, 34].

The  REPAIR  studies  also demonstrated  significant effects of CNM-Au8 on ATP levels and on the phosphorylation potential using the full volume coil. Global assessment of brain metabolite changes may provide a measure of  the  overall  burden  of  disease  on  the  brain,  independent of specific brain regions, and thus be more comparable across studies and disease states [35]. We observed a significant relationship between the percent change in brain  ATP  level  (baseline  to  end-of-study)  and  baseline ATP levels. Participants with low ATP at baseline exhibited  increased  ATP at the end of the study, while those with high ATP at baseline had reduced ATP at study end. A  similar  relationship  was  observed  between  percent change  in  brain  phosphorylation  potential  and  participants'  baseline  phosphorylation  potential.  Phosphorylation  potential,  an  index  of  bioenergetic  state  reflecting the  amount of free energy readily available to cells,  has been demonstrated to be lower in patients with PD [30], mitochondrial  myopathy  [36],  and  Leber's  hereditary optic  neuropathy  [37],  all  diseases  with  mitochondrial impairment.

We believe these observations demonstrate an important  homeostatic  energetic  effect  of  CNM-Au8  in  these patient  populations.  Both  increased  and  decreased  levels  of  brain  ATP  are  indicative  of  disease  state,  in  both PD and  MS.  In  PD,  a  low  ATP/Pi  ratio  is  seen  in  Parkinson's  disease  [38]  and  a  concurrent  FDG-PET  study showed  this  change  accompanies  reduction  in  rate  of glucose uptake [39]. Thus, in PD patients with low ATP or phosphorylation potential, the increase in ATP levels by  end  of  study  could  be  considered  therapeutic.  Likewise,  in  MS  patients,  brain  ATP  levels  correlated  with MS  disease  severity  as  measured  by  EDSS  suggesting brain  energy  metabolic  support  may  be  an  important therapeutic  target  [13].  Further,  PD  patients  have  been shown to have resting brain ATP levels that are lower in PD brain  compared  to  matched  healthy  controls,  while the  ATP  forward  rate  constant  is  higher  in  PD  brains compared to controls, indicating  the  existence  of  a  cellular  energy  compensatory  mechanism  whereby  brain cells  attempt  to  maintain  ATP  homeostasis  by  increasing ATPase activity and ATP production [3]. High ATP

levels were also reported in PD patients homozygous for PINK1  mutations  which  are  known  to  cause  dysfunction of the mitochondrial respiratory chain [40]. The elevated ATP concentration seen in these participants was hypothesized  to  result  from  astrocytic  glycolysis  in  the setting  of  neuronal  degeneration  [40].  Astrocytes,  serving  as  supportive  cells,  provide  trophic  metabolites  and ATP to diseased neurons, and in response to exigent neuronal energetic needs, can transition to a glycolytic and oxidative  energy-producing  'overdrive'  state  to  pump out  excess  ATP  [41].  In  this  theory  of  attempted  ATP compensation, the finding of high concentrations of ATP in a PD brain could point to neuronal crisis, rather than health [40]. Therefore, our finding of CNM-Au8-related homeostatic effects on  β-ATP, as well as on the related phosphorylation  potential,  is  noteworthy  and  warrants further investigation.

This short-duration study was underpowered to detect clinical  benefit  with  CNM-Au8  treatment,  and  thus  the finding of no significant clinical benefit (as manifested by stable MDS-UPDRS total scores and APDM gait/balance parameters) was anticipated. We attribute the statistically significant improvement in MDS-UPDRS part 2 (driven by improvement at 4 weeks) to a placebo effect induced by expectation of benefit by subjects who knew they were taking active drug. Historically, symptomatic effects, i.e., effects with short-lived beneficial impact that converge to the level of placebo with time and that lack evidence of longer-term neuroprotection, have confounded outcome measure interpretation for putative neuroprotective drugs [42, 43]. In this context, we view the lack of such a symptomatic effect of clinical improvement of CNM-Au8 during this short trial as an advantage for the continued development of this putative disease modifying agent.

## Conclusions

CNM-Au8 is  a  nanomedicine  being  developed  to  treat failures in energy metabolism associated with many neurodegenerative  diseases.  Its  novel  mechanism  of  action includes  targeting  the  redox  couple  NAD + and  NADH, the key drivers of ATP production and utilization in all cells. Three double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled Phase 2 clinical trials have been conducted investigating  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  CNM-Au8  to  treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and multiple sclerosis, with long-term extension studies  associated  with  these  trials currently ongoing. Results from the REPAIR studies indicate  that,  in  concordance  with  preclinical  studies,  brain energy metabolism is favorably modulated in individuals with MS or PD. Together with the emerging results from the  placebo-controlled  trials  [44],  CNM-Au8  represents a strong candidate drug with appropriate target engagement and safety data supporting its advancement Phase 3 trials for the treatment of neurodegenerative disease.

## List of abbreviations

| 31 P-MRS   | 31 Phosphorous-Magnetic resonance spectroscopy                                               |
| ATP        | Adenosine triphosphate                                                                       |
| BW         | Bandwidth                                                                                    |
| C-SSRS     | Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale                                                       |
| CGI-C      | Clinician Global Impression of Change                                                        |
| CGI-S      | Clinician Global Impression of Severity                                                      |
| CNS        | Central nervous system                                                                       |
| DA         | Dopaminergic                                                                                 |
| ECG        | Electrocardiogram                                                                            |
| EDSS       | Expanded Disability Rating Scale                                                             |
| GPC        | Glycerophosphocholine                                                                        |
| GPE        | Glycerophosphoethanolamine                                                                   |
| HIV        | Human immunodeficiency virus                                                                 |
| iPSC       | Induced pluripotent stem cell                                                                |
| IR         | Inversion-recovery                                                                           |
| MDS-UPDRS  | Movement Disorder Society-Sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale |
| MoCA       | Montreal Cognitive Assessment                                                                |
| MS         | Multiple sclerosis                                                                           |
| NA         | Number of acquisitions                                                                       |
| NAD+       | Oxidized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide                                           |
| NADH       | Reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide                                            |
| NP         | Number of sampling points                                                                    |
| PC         | Phosphocholine                                                                               |
| PCr        | Phosphocreatine                                                                              |
| PD         | Parkinson's Disease                                                                          |
| PD         | Pharmacodynamics                                                                             |
| PE         | Phosphoethanolamine                                                                          |
| PGI-C      | Patient Global Impression of Change                                                          |
| PGI-S      | Patient Global Impression of Severity                                                        |
| Pi         | Inorganic phosphate                                                                          |
| PK         | Pharmacokinetics                                                                             |
| RF         | Radiofrequency                                                                               |
| SAE        | Serious adverse event                                                                        |
| SD         | Standard deviation                                                                           |
| T/R        | Transmit/receive                                                                             |
| TEAE       | Treatment emergent adverse event                                                             |
| TUG        | Timed Up and Go                                                                              |
| UDPG       | Uridine diphosphate glucose                                                                  |

## Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi. org/10.1186/s12951-023-02236-z.

Supplementary Material 1

## Acknowledgements

We are deeply grateful to the study participants and their families for their willingness to participate in clinical research. We thank Nasreen Sayed, Lisa Lamottte, and Jan Cameron-Watts of UT Southwestern for study coordination of REPAIR-PD, and Manuel Huichapa, Taylor Quance, and Ana Raicu of UT Southwestern for study coordination of REPAIR-MS.

## Author contributions

MTH, JR, RBD Jr, BMG, and KSH conceived and designed the study; RBD Jr, BMG, and PS were clinical trial lead researchers of this study; AR, JaE, JeE, RG, and MTH led trial operations for the study; RG served as safety monitor of the study; JR, RBDIII, RBD Jr, BMG and PS led data acquisition; all authors substantially participated in analysis and interpretation of data with SL and MTH leading the statistical analysis. KSH and MTH drafted the work and all authors participated in revising and editing. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding

Clene Nanomedicine, Inc., funded this study.

## Data availability

All datasets used and/or analysed during this study are either included in this published article and its supplementary information files, or are available as de-identified, HIPAA-compliant datasets upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. To protect the privacy of individuals who participated in this study, a fully executed data transfer agreement between Clene Nanomedicine, Inc., and the third party may be required.

A control dataset used for power calculation and refinement of the 31 P-MRS analysis of NAD + and NADH levels was published as a pilot study preceding this work. These data are available from: Ren J, Malloy CR, Sherry AD. Quantitative measurement of redox state in human brain by 31 P MRS at 7T with spectral simplification and inclusion of multiple nucleotide sugar components in data analysis. Magn Reson Med 2020;84:2338-51. https://doi. org/10.1002/mrm.28306. [Ref [24]].

## Declarations

## Competing interests

JR, RBDIII, and RBD Jr have no competing interests to declare. AR, JaE, JeE, KSH, RG, MTH and BMG are employees of Clene and own stock in the company. At the time of study conductance, BMG was solely affiliated with UTSW. He was employed by Clene as a consultant after the conclusion of the described studies. SL is an employee of the contract research organization, Instat. PS has no disclosures related to this publication. He has received consulting fees from Medical Logix LLC, Genentech, and Bristol Myers Squibb.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate

Study protocols were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center (IRB# STU-20190992 and STU-2019-0625, for REPAIR-MS and REPAIR-PD, respectively). Trials were conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice Guidelines of the International Conference on Harmonization and the ethical principles of the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000 [25]. REPAIR-PD was registered on clinicaltrials.gov with registration number NCT03815916 and REPAIR-MS with registration number NCT03993171 prior to the enrollment of the first participants for each trial. All participants provided written consent prior to participating in the study.

## Consent for publication

Not applicable.

Received: 3 November 2023 / Accepted: 2 December 2023

## Table 1

| 0                                              | 1                                 |
|:-----------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| Baseline Participant Demographics              | Baseline Participant Demographics |
| Age (years)                                    | 65.9±7.8                          |
| Sex (% Male)                                   | 54%                               |
| Race/ethnicity, non-Hispanic White (%)         | 92%                               |
| Age at diagnosis (years)                       | 64.5±8.1                          |
| Time from diagnosis at enrollment (months)     | 17.2±8.8                          |
| MMSE                                           | 28.8±1.3                          |
| MDS UPDRS Part I                               | 4.8±3.4                           |
| MDS UPDRS Part II                              | 3.0±2.6                           |
| MDS UPDRS Part III                             | 20.5±8.1                          |
| MDS UPDRS Part IV                              | 1.0±1.5                           |
| MDS UPDRSTotal                                 | 29.4±9.3                          |
| Average Levodopa Dose (in IR equivalents, mg)  | 532±267                           |
| # of patients on Carbidopa/Levodopa only       | 9 (70%)                           |
| # of patients on MAO-B inhibitor (rasagiline)  | 3 (23%)                           |
| # of patients on dopamine agonist (ropinirole) | 1 (7.7%)                          |

## Table 2

| 0                                             | 1         |
|:----------------------------------------------|:----------|
| Age (years)                                   | 41.6±10.0 |
| BMI (kg/m 2 )                                 | 27.9±5.7  |
| Sex (% Female)                                | 69%       |
| Race/ethnicity, non-Hispanic White (%)        | 85%       |
| Age at diagnosis (years)                      | 34.5±9.4  |
| Time from symptom onset at enrollment (years) | 7.1±4.6   |
| Time since last relapse (years)               | 4.5±3.2   |
| %Treated with natalizumab                     | 100%      |
| EDSS Score                                    | 2.7±1.9   |

## Table 3

| 0         | 1                                                                                            |
|:----------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 31 P-MRS  | 31 Phosphorous-Magnetic resonance spectroscopy                                               |
| ATP       | Adenosine triphosphate                                                                       |
| BW        | Bandwidth                                                                                    |
| C-SSRS    | Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale                                                       |
| CGI-C     | Clinician Global Impression of Change                                                        |
| CGI-S     | Clinician Global Impression of Severity                                                      |
| CNS       | Central nervous system                                                                       |
| DA        | Dopaminergic                                                                                 |
| ECG       | Electrocardiogram                                                                            |
| EDSS      | Expanded Disability Rating Scale                                                             |
| GPC       | Glycerophosphocholine                                                                        |
| GPE       | Glycerophosphoethanolamine                                                                   |
| HIV       | Human immunodeficiency virus                                                                 |
| iPSC      | Induced pluripotent stem cell                                                                |
| IR        | Inversion-recovery                                                                           |
| MDS-UPDRS | Movement Disorder Society-Sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale |
| MoCA      | Montreal Cognitive Assessment                                                                |
| MS        | Multiple sclerosis                                                                           |
| NA        | Number of acquisitions                                                                       |
| NAD+      | Oxidized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide                                           |
| NADH      | Reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide                                            |
| NP        | Number of sampling points                                                                    |
| PC        | Phosphocholine                                                                               |
| PCr       | Phosphocreatine                                                                              |
| PD        | Parkinson's Disease                                                                          |
| PD        | Pharmacodynamics                                                                             |
| PE        | Phosphoethanolamine                                                                          |
| PGI-C     | Patient Global Impression of Change                                                          |
| PGI-S     | Patient Global Impression of Severity                                                        |
| Pi        | Inorganic phosphate                                                                          |
| PK        | Pharmacokinetics                                                                             |
| RF        | Radiofrequency                                                                               |
| SAE       | Serious adverse event                                                                        |
| SD        | Standard deviation                                                                           |
| T/R       | Transmit/receive                                                                             |
| TEAE      | Treatment emergent adverse event                                                             |
| TUG       | Timed Up and Go                                                                              |
| UDPG      | Uridine diphosphate glucose                                                                  |