## Introduction

Lewy body dementia is an umbrella term that comprises both dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). Together, these conditions are the second commonest neurodegenerative dementia in people aged over 65 years, conferring significant morbidity and healthcare burden. 1 They are characterized by dementia affecting visuospatial, executive and attentional function,  and  the  presence  of  at  least  two  symptoms  of  motor Parkinsonism, visual hallucinations, cognitive fluctuations and rapid  eye  movement (REM)  sleep  behaviour  disorder.  DLB  is  diagnosed when dementia precedes or occurs within 1 year of onset of motor Parkinsonian symptoms. However, if dementia develops more than a year after the onset of motor symptoms, this would be considered PDD. 2

As well as shared symptomatology, both DLB and PDD are characterized  by  the  presence  of  alpha-synuclein-containing  Lewy bodies, and co-pathology with beta-amyloid and tau accumulation.  A  long-standing  question  is  whether  the  two  conditions have different underlying neurobiological processes. 3,4 This has been challenging to address until recently, as neuropathological investigations are mostly restricted to end-stage disease. Neuroimaging  has  been  limited,  as  conventional  approaches mostly examined grey matter volume or thickness. Even in relatively large studies, these do not relate strongly to clinical symptoms 5 and differences between DLB and PDD  have been inconsistent.  Some  studies  show  greater  atrophy  in  DLB  than PDD; 6 whilst others showed no differences in atrophy patterns between the two conditions. 7

Instead, imaging techniques sensitive to changes in tissue composition, rather than volume and thickness, are likely to be more sensitive to any differences between DLB and PDD, and to relate to clinical severity.

One promising approach is quantitative susceptibility mapping (QSM), an MRI technique that calculates the magnetic susceptibility of brain tissue. 8,9 This reflects brain tissue composition, including iron content, which is relevant in PDD and DLB, as excessive iron interacts  with  alpha-synuclein  and  triggers  pathological  aggregation 10 and causes direct toxicity by generating free radicals. 11 As well as brain tissue iron, differences in QSM values reflect changes in other metal ions such as calcium and copper, and variation in myelin content. 12

We have previously shown that QSM values relate to cognitive severity in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) without dementia, 13 and that regional QSM values predict future cognitive and motor severity in PD. 14 There are no reports of direct DLB versus PDD comparisons  using  QSM,  or  between  the  combined  grouping  of Lewy  body  dementia  compared  with  PD  with  normal  cognition (PD-NC). However, in a study examining only the substantia nigra in DLB, higher QSM values were seen in DLB than in mild cognitive impairment with Lewy bodies (and compared with people with REM sleep behaviour disorder). 15

Here, we used QSM to compare brain tissue composition between people with Lewy body dementia and those with PD-NC and  between  subtypes  of  Lewy  body  dementia:  DLB  and  PDD. We predicted higher QSM values, which reflects more altered tissue  composition,  in  Lewy  body  dementia  than  PD-NC,  due  to greater overall disease severity. We expected more pronounced alterations in DLB than PDD, due to higher levels of beta-amyloid pathology in DLB than PDD. 16 Based on our previous findings in PD we also hypothesized that an increased QSM level would be associated with poorer cognitive and motor performance in all disease groups.

## Materials and methods

## Participants

Participants  were  recruited  from  PD  and  Lewy  body  dementia clinics at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London,  and  affiliated  clinics,  between  2017  and  2023.  Controls were recruited from patient's spouses and university databases; 189  participants  were  included,  comprising  86  people  with  PD who were cognitively unimpaired (PD-NC), 66 people with Lewy body dementia (45 DLB and 21 PDD) and 37 unaffected controls. Inclusion criteria were: a diagnosis of DLB, PDD or PD within 10 years of their respective diagnosis, aged 49-81 years. DLB diagnosis was made using DLB Consortium Criteria; 2 PDD diagnosis according to Movement Disorder Society (MDS) PDD diagnostic criteria 17 and PD diagnosis using Queen Square Brain Bank criteria; capacity to consent was a requirement for inclusion. Exclusion criteria were confounding neurological or psychiatric conditions and any contraindications to MRI. All participants were assessed by a neurologist (R.S.W.) to ascertain diagnosis of DLB, PDD or PD-NC and capacity to  consent.  All  participants  gave  written,  informed  consent  and the  study  was  approved  by  the  Queen  Square  Research  Ethics Committee.

## Clinical assessments

All participants underwent detailed clinical assessments whilst on their usual medications, and levodopa equivalent daily dose was calculated. 18 Disease-specific measures were obtained using validated questionnaires including the MDS Unified PD Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS)  that  measures  motor  and  non-motor  domains. 19 Part III of this scale was used to assess motor function, and total score was the summed score of parts I-IV.

Detailed neuropsychological assessment included the Montreal Cognitive  Assessment  (MoCA) 20 as  a  global  measure;  and  tests across  each  cognitive  domain,  as  described  previously. 21 These test scores (Stroop colour, Hooper Visual Organization, word recognition, verbal fluency category and letter, MoCA) were also combined into a composite cognitive score, using the mean Z -score of each measure, as described previously. 21,22

## MRI acquisition

Participants underwent MRI scanning on a Siemens Prisma-fit 3T MRI system using a 64-channel coil (Siemens Healthcare). T1-weighted magnetization-prepared 3D rapid, gradient-echo (MPRAGE) anatomical images were acquired with the following parameters: inversion time = 1100 ms,  first  echo  time = 3.34 ms,  repetition  time  (TR) = 2530 ms,  flip  angle = 7°,  bandwidth = 200 Hz/pixel,  resolution = 1 × 1 × 1 mm,  matrix  size = 256 × 256 × 176,  acquisition  time  6 min  3 s. Susceptibility-weighted images for QSM were acquired using a 3D flow-compensated  spoiled  gradient-recalled-echo  sequence  with the  following  parameters:  TE = 18 ms,  TR = 25 ms,  flip  angle = 12°, bandwidth = 110 Hz/pixel,  resolution = 1 × 1 × 1 mm,  matrix  size = 204 × 224 × 160, acquisition time 5 min 41 s. Rate 2 × 1 parallel acquisition (GRAPPA) was enabled for both sequences. 23

## QSM reconstruction

QSM  reconstruction  was  performed  as  described  previously. 14 Briefly, QSM phase data were unwrapped using rapid opensource minimum spanning tree algorithm 24 and brain masks calculated from  magnitude  images  using  the  Brain  Extraction  Tool  (BET2). Background field removal was performed using Laplacian boundary value extraction 25 followed by 3D polynomial residual fitting. 26 Multi-scale  dipole  inversion  was  used  to  generate  susceptibility maps. 27 All image processing was completed using MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc., MA, USA). This pipeline has previously been optimized specifically for these acquisition parameters and disease cohort, 14,28 and high-quality susceptibility maps for three representative subjects with LBD can be seen in Supplementary Fig.  1.  A  study-wide  template  was  created  from  all  participants' T1-weighted images and QSM images were transformed into this space  using  advanced  normalization  tools  (ANTs,  http://stnava. github.io/ANTs/), as described previously. 13

## Voxel-wise QSM analyses

Voxel-wise QSM  analyses were performed throughout the brain using absolute  QSM  values,  as  has  been  performed previously. 13,14,29,30 This was required because the application of a  smoothing  kernel,  necessary  in  such  voxel-wise  analyses  to account  for  coregistration  inaccuracies  and  improve  statistical conditioning, may collapse adjacent negative and positive values (commonly found in signed QSM data) to zero. The use of absolute QSM helps to avoid this issue, while also rendering values more comparable to the positive nature of R2*. Smoothing is not required for region of interest (ROI) analyses, so these were performed  using  the  original  signed  QSM  values.  Images  were spatially smoothed using a 3D Gaussian kernel [3 mm full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM)] and then smoothing compensated. 30 FSL  Randomise  was  used  to  perform  permutation analyses with threshold-free cluster enhancement, whereby 10 000 permutations were performed to identify significant clusters which were reported at family-wise error (FWE)-corrected P &lt; 0.05 ( P FWE &lt; 0.05) thresholds. Analyses were performed to compare differences between Lewy body dementia, PD-NC and controls, and between DLB and PDD, adjusting for age and sex. Secondary analyses separately compared DLB and PDD with both PD-NC and controls. Analyses were re-run with total brain volume (TBV) as an additional covariate to control for atrophy. 31,32 TBV was defined as the total volume of grey- and white-matter fractions estimated by the SPM segment  function.  Further  analyses  were  run  to  test  associations between  voxel-wise  QSM  smoothed  absolute  values  and  clinical measures (composite cognitive score, MoCA, UPDRS and UPDRS-motor),  adjusting for age and  sex. After analysis, the smoothed  QSM  template  and  statistical  maps  were  transformed into MNI152 space (Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Canada) for display purposes. 29

## Region of interest QSM analyses

ROI analyses were performed to compare group differences in QSM in specific regions, and test associations between regional QSM and clinical measures. As the existing research using QSM in Lewy body dementia is limited to a single study, 15 we selected regions in which QSM has been found to be related to cognitive and motor severity in PD, 13,14 and Alzheimer's disease. 33 Our choice of ROIs was also informed by findings from studies using conventional measures of atrophy  in  Lewy  body  dementia 7,34-37 as  atrophy  is  a  measure  of neuronal loss 38 likely to arise downstream of cellular iron dyshomeostasis. 10,39 Specifically,  we  chose  the  nucleus basalis of Meynert (NBM), globus pallidus, caudate nucleus, putamen, substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNpr), substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc), thalamus, hippocampus, insula, medial orbitofrontal, superior parietal and lateral occipital cortices; see the Supplementary material, 'Methods' section for details on ROI segmentation. Mean signed unsmoothed QSM values were calculated in bilateral ROIs. As the whole-brain voxel-wise analysis was performed using absolute QSM, the use of signed QSM for ROI analysis provided some indication of the contributions of diamagnetic and paramagnetic sources of susceptibility to our results. Interhemispheric  differences  were  examined  using t -tests;  and then ROI means were averaged across hemispheres (see Supplementary Table 1A-C for differences between hemispheres).

We  examined  group  differences  in  QSM  values  within  ROIs using ANOVAs, adjusting for age and sex, and false discovery rate (FDR) was used to correct for multiple comparisons. We report fully corrected findings, and also uncorrected findings for completeness. Where significant F-statistics were observed, post hoc pairwise comparisons  [corrected  using  Tukey's  honest  significant  difference (HSD)] were used to probe specific group differences. Where appropriate, median and interquartile range (IQR) of ROI mean QSM values are presented. Relationships between signed ROI mean QSM values and motor and cognitive severity were examined using linear regression, adjusting for age and sex, and FDR correcting across comparisons. ROI analyses were performed in R (v.4.2.2; https:// www.r-project.org/). While we chose to employ standard few correction in our voxel-wise analyses due their extremely high dimensionality,  we  employed  less  conservative  FDR  correction  for  the much lower-dimensionality ROI analyses where we had prior expectation of involvement.

In  order  to  compare  our  findings  with  those  of  Chen et  al ., 15 which is  the  only  previous  study  to  report  QSM  values  in  Lewy body dementia, we additionally extracted mean QSM values from the entire SN, combining SNpc and SNpr, and assessed betweenstudy differences using t -tests. 15

## Voxel-based morphometry

To compare the sensitivity of QSM to detect group differences with that of atrophy-based neuroimaging measures, and to further investigate the extent to which atrophy might act as a confound to QSM  we  performed  voxel-based  morphometry  (VBM)  analyses. SPM12 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12) was used to segment T1-weighted images. A population template was

derived for the whole study population using the diffeomorphic anatomical registration through exponentiated Lie algebra toolbox with  a  Gaussian  smoothing  kernel  of  8 mm  FWHM.  Voxel-wise grey-matter probability maps were assessed using FSL Randomise with threshold-free cluster enhancement, and 10 000 permutations were performed to identify significant clusters at P FWE &lt; 0.05. Group comparisons were made using two-sample t -tests. Regression analyses  were run to test the associations between voxel-wise grey matter probabilities and clinical measures including the composite cognitive score which takes into account detailed neuropsychological testing in five cognitive domains. All analyses were adjusted  for  age,  sex  and  total  intra-cranial  volume.  Significant clusters  (extent  threshold &gt; 100  voxels)  were  labelled  using  the Harvard-Oxford Cortical Structural atlas.

## Additional statistical analyses

Demographic  and  clinical  measures  were  compared  between groups  using two-tailed  Welch's t -tests  or  Mann-WhitneyWilcoxon  tests  for  non-normally  distributed  data.  When  three groups were compared, we used the Kruskal-Wallis test as the data  were  non-normally  distributed,  followed  by  the  Dunn's test  for post  hoc pairwise  analysis  with  Bonferroni  correction. We  used  linear  regression  to  examine  relationships  between clinical  variables. P &lt; 0.05,  Bonferroni  corrected  for  multiple comparisons,  was  accepted  as  the  threshold  for  statistical significance.

## Results

A total of 189 participants were included in our study: 66 Lewy body dementia (45 DLB; 21 PDD), 86 PD-NC and 37 controls. People with Lewy body dementia were older, had a higher proportion of males and were less educated than controls and PD-NC. Disease duration between Lewy body dementia and PD-NC did not differ. People with DLB and PDD did not differ in age, sex or education. There was no difference in dementia duration between DLB and PDD, but people with PDD had overall longer duration of disease due to PD prior to dementia diagnosis. As expected, people with Lewy body dementia had poorer cognition (MoCA and composite cognitive score) compared with PD-NC and controls. They also had increased overall disease severity (MDS-UPDRS total) and motor severity (MDS-UPDRS motor). We did not find significant differences in cognitive measures between PDD and DLB, but people with PDD had greater motor  and  overall  disease  severity  than  DLB.  See  Table  1 for demographic and clinical information.

## Voxel-wise QSM in Lewy body dementia and between Lewy body dementia subtypes

We found increased absolute QSM values in several brain regions in Lewy body dementia compared with controls and PD-NC ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). For both comparisons, the bilateral superior frontal, bilateral medial temporal, left superior temporal, right precentral and left cerebellar cortex were involved (Fig. 1A and B). There were no brain regions with increased absolute QSM values in controls and PD-NC compared with Lewy body dementia.

For PDD compared with DLB, we found widespread increased QSM  values,  with  differences  in  the  bilateral  cerebellar,  hippocampi, right amygdala, left SNpr, left frontal, left precentral, left paracentral and left precuneus ( P FWE &lt; 0.05) (Fig. 1C). There were no brain regions in which the reverse relationship was observed.

See  Supplementary  Fig.  2 for  comparisons  between  PDD  and controls,  PDD  and  PD-NC,  DLB  versus  controls  and  DLB  versus PD-NC.

We performed a secondary analysis correcting for atrophy using total brain volume (TBV), to test whether this was driving the observed group differences. We still observed increases in QSM values in Lewy body dementia and in PDD, even when using TBV correction (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 3). There were greater differences between LBD and controls but less for LBD compared with PD-NC and PDD compared with DLB.

## Relationships between voxel-wise QSM and clinical measures in Lewy body dementia

We found a significant positive correlation between absolute QSM values and disease severity, measured using total MDS-UPDRS, in several brain areas in people with Lewy body dementia. This means that higher absolute QSM values were found in subjects with greater MDS-UPDRS scores. These correlations were found in areas including  the  right  thalamus,  left  pallidum,  bilateral  SNpr  and SNpc, bilateral middle frontal, temporal and lateral occipital lobes, right precentral and superior frontal cortices (Fig. 3A; P FWE &lt; 0.05). We also found significant positive associations between absolute QSM values and motor severity in the bilateral superior frontal, right  insula  and  right  middle  frontal  lobes  (Fig.  3B; P FWE &lt; 0.05). These relationships were also found in DLB (Fig. 3C and D; P FWE &lt; 0.05), but not in PDD. We did not find significant voxel-wise associations between absolute QSM values and cognitive measures in any group.

## ROI QSM differences in Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia subtypes

In ROI analyses we found group differences in QSM values in four regions, but only the SNpr and insular survived corrections for multiple comparisons (see Fig. 4). Specifically, for the SNpr, we found increased QSM values when comparing PDD to controls [PDD median = 0.065  (IQR = 0.036);  controls  median = 0.038  (IQR = 0.025); Tukey P HSD = 0.00015].  We  similarly  found  increases  comparing PDD  to  PD-NC  [PD-NC  median = 0.046  (IQR = 0.034), P HSD = 0.029] and  PDD  compared  with  DLB  [DLB  median = 0.035  (IQR = 0.031); P HSD = 0.0011] (Fig. 4A and see Table 2 for comparisons). ANOVA revealed group differences in the SNpc (Fig. 4B and Table 2) and putamen (Fig. 4C and Table 2) but these did not survive correction for multiple corrections.

In  the  insula,  we  found  significantly  higher  QSM  values  for PD-NC compared with PDD [PD-NC mean = -0.0041 (SD = 0.0046), PDD mean = 0.0041 (SD = 0.0063); diff = 0.0040; Tukey P HSD = 0.00070];  and  for  PD-NC  compared  with  DLB  [DLB  mean = 0.0061 (SD = 0.0041); diff = 0.0020; Tukey P HSD = 0.048] (Fig. 4D and Table 2).

## Relationships between ROI QSM values and clinical measures

We found a significant positive association between overall disease severity (MDS-UPDRS total score) and ROI mean signed QSM values in  the  SNpr  in  Lewy  body  dementia  ( β = 336.72; P FDR = 0.010) (Fig. 5A). In this group, we also found a positive association of motor severity with ROI mean signed QSM values in the SNpr but this was not significant ( β = 159.45; P FDR = 0.08). In people with PDD, disease severity was also positively associated with QSM values, but only in  the  superior  parietal  cortex  ( β = 1907.35; P FDR = 0.03)  (Fig.  5B). Two PDD participants had mean QSM values that were outlying,

Table 1 Demographics and clinical variables in Lewy body dementia, PD and controls

Statistical comparisons

Group

| LBD versus PD-NC versus Controls                                                                                 | χ 2 = 39.15 df = 2 P = 3.16 × 10 - 9a,b χ 2 = 23.23 df = 2 P = 9.03 × 10 - 6a,b W = 3288 P = 0.092 - χ 2 = 6.80 df = 2 P = 0.03 a,b χ 2 = 99.06 df = 2 P < 2.20 × 10 - 16a,b χ 2 = 102.13 df = 2 P < 2.20 × 10 - 16a,b χ 2 = 112.92 df = 2 P < 2.20 × 10 - 16a,b,c χ 2 = 94.20 df = 2, P < 2.20 × 10 - 16a,b,c W = 2360 P = 0.07 -   |
| DLB versus PDD W = 580.5 P = 0.14 χ 2 = 0.60 df = 1 P = 0.44 W = 77 P = 3.90 × 10 - 8 W = 416.5 P = 0.43         | W = 471.5 P = 0.99 W = 432 P = 0.58 W = 348 P = 0.39 W = 296.5 P = 0.016 W = 327 P = 0.046 W = 113 P = 5.56 × 10 - 7 χ 2 = 12.45 df = 1                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Controls ( n = 37) 65.8 (9.0) 17/20 - -                                                                          | 17.5 (2.5) 28.6 (1.6) 0.00 (0.56) 8.3 (5.1) 4.8 (4.3) - -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| PD-NC ( n = 86) 63.6 (7.9) 41/45 4.2 (2.5) - 17.2 (2.8)                                                          | 28.1 (1.9) - 0.20 (0.73) 44.2 (21.3) 20.4 (14.2) 472.55 (252.88) -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| LBD ( n = 66) 71.9 (6.0) 8/58 4.3 (4.6) 2.1 (1.8)                                                                | 15.9 (3.4) 21.5 (5.0) - 2.65 (1.70) 71.3 (29.4) 36.0 (16.1) 425.98 (378.7) 46/20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| PDD ( n = 21) 70.5 (6.5) 4/17 8.7 (5.5) 1.9 (1.8)                                                                | 16.0 (3.6) 22.3 (3.9) - 2.33 (1.50) 83.1 (23.5) 40.6 (11.1) 773.33 (374.30) 8/13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| DLB ( n = 45) 4/41 2.2 (1.9) 2.2 (1.9)                                                                           | 15.9 (3.3) 21.2 (5.4) - 2.78 (1.77) 65.8 (30.4) 33.8 (17.6) 263.89 (252.63) 38/7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Demographics Age (years), mean (SD) 72.6 (5.6) Sex, F/M Diagnosis (years), mean (SD) Dementia (years), mean (SD) | Education (years), mean (SD) Clinical features MoCA, mean (SD) Composite cognitive score, mean (SD) MDS-UPDRS, mean (SD) MDS-UPDRS-motor, mean (SD) LEDD AChEIs medication, yes/no                                                                                                                                                   |

comparisons between Controls and LBD.

Significant differences in post hoc

comparisons between PD-NC and LBD.

post hoc

Significant differences in

c Significant differences in post hoc comparisons between Controls and PD-NC.

A Increased QSM in LBD compared to controls

Susceptibility (por

Susceptibility (PPr

B Increased QSM in LBD compared to PD-NC

Increased QSM in LBD compared to PD-NC

Susceptibility (ppe

Susceptibility (ppm|

Increased QSM in PDD compared to DLB

Susceptibility (opm

Figure  1  Voxel-wise  group  comparison  of  absolute  QSM  values throughout the brain. ( A )  LBD compared with controls. ( B ) LBD compared with PD-NC. ( C )  PDD compared with DLB. Results are overlaid on the study-wide QSM template in MNI152 space, and numbers represent axial slice location in MNI152 space. Left side is shown on the left . Red/yellow clusters represent voxels where a significant relationship was seen at FWE-corrected P &lt; 0.05, with increased absolute QSM values. DLB = dementia with Lewy bodies; FWE = family-wise error; LBD = Lewy body dementia;  MNI = Montreal  Neurological  Institute;  PDD = Parkinson's disease dementia; PD-NC = Parkinson's disease with normal cognition; QSM = quantitative susceptibility mapping.

Figure 2  Group comparison of absolute QSM values in whole brain analysis, additionally corrected for TBV. ( A )  Increased QSM in LBD compared with controls. ( B ) Increased QSM in LBD compared with PD-NC. ( C ) Increased QSM in PDD compared with DLB. Results are overlaid on the study-wise QSM template in MNI152 space, and numbers represent axial slice location in MNI152 space. Left side is shown on the left. Red/ yellow clusters represent voxels where a significant relationship was seen at FWE-corrected P &lt; 0.05 (corrected for age, sex and TBV). DLB = dementia with Lewy bodies; FWE = family-wise error; LBD = Lewy body dementia;  MNI = Montreal  Neurological  Institute;  PDD = Parkinson's disease dementia; PD-NC = Parkinson's disease with normal cognition; QSM = quantitative susceptibility mapping; TBV = total brain volume.

A QSM versus MDS-UPDRS total score in LBD

Susceptibility (ppm

C QSM versus MDS-UPDRS total score in DLB

Susceptibility

Figure 3  Voxel-wise association of absolute QSM values with MDS-UPDRS scores in people with Lewy body dementia. Association between absolute QSM values and: ( A )  overall  disease  severity  (MDS-UPDRS  total)  in  LBD;  ( B )  motor  severity  (MDS-UPDRS  III)  in  LBD;  ( C )  overall  disease  severity (MDS-UPDRS total) in DLB; ( D ) motor severity (MDS-UPDRS III) in DLB. Results are overlaid on the study-wide QSM template in MNI152 space, and numbers represent axial slice location in MNI152 space. Left side is shown on the left. Red/yellow clusters represent voxels where a significant positive relationship was seen at P FWE &lt; 0.05. DLB = dementia with Lewy bodies; FWE = family-wise error; LBD = Lewy body dementia; MDS-UPDRS = Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale; MNI = Montreal Neurological Institute; QSM = quantitative susceptibility mapping.

-0.014 (which is &lt; median - 1.5 × IQR) and 0.028 (which is &gt; median + 1.5 × IQR), respectively. We re-ran the regression analysis excluding these participants and found an even stronger relationship between higher QSM values and greater disease severity [ β = 4431.69; standard error (SE) = 1467.59; t = 3.02; P = 0.0086]. We did not find any other significant associations between clinical measures and regional mean signed QSM values in Lewy body dementia, PDD or DLB (see Supplementary Table 2 for ROI associations with clinical measures in Lewy body dementia, Supplementary Table 3 for DLB and Supplementary Table 4 for PDD).

## Comparison of Lewy body dementia QSM values with previously reported values

Our results did not differ from the previously reported QSM study in Lewy body dementia. 15 We found that QSM values in the whole SN aligned with one another across studies, and found no between- study group differences after correction for multiple comparisons (see Supplementary Tables 5 and 6).

VBM comparing Lewy body dementia with controls revealed significant volume loss in Lewy body dementia in the left parahippocampal  gyrus  and  middle  frontal  gyrus,  and  in  the  right  inferior temporal gyrus, precentral gyrus and precuneus ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). We also  found  volume  loss  in  the  bilateral  parahippocampal  gyrus frontal, bilateral inferior temporal gyrus and left temporal pole in DLB compared with controls,  right  precentral  gyrus,  left  middle frontal gyrus and right intracalcarine sulcus and in the right superior frontal cortex for PDD compared with controls ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). We found volume loss in Lewy body dementia relative to PD-NC in the bilateral  parahippocampal  gyri,  left  inferior  temporal  gyrus  and temporal pole, and right insular cortex ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). We also found

B QSM versus MDS-UPDRS motor score in LBD

A SNpr

Magnetic Susceptibility (ppm)

CTRL

C Putamen

Figure 4  Signed QSM values in regions of interest showing group-level differences. QSM values for LBD subtypes and people with Parkinson's in: ( A ) substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNpr); ( B ) QSM values in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc); ( C ) QSM values in the putamen; ( D ) QSM values in the insula. For each ROI, we show the individual's mean QSM values, which have been averaged across both hemispheres. The horizontal bar is the group median and the box indicates the interquartile range between the first ( bottom ) and third ( top ) quartiles. Note that QSM values for ROI analyses are signed, rather than absolute values (see 'Materials and methods' section). ANOVAs were performed to identify group level differences. Post hoc pairwise comparisons for significant regions: * P &lt; 0.05, ** P &lt; 0.001. DLB = dementia with Lewy bodies; LBD = Lewy body dementia; PDD = Parkinson's disease dementia; QSM = quantitative susceptibility mapping; ROI = region of interest.

volume loss in the left parahippocampal gyrus in DLB relative to PD-NC, and in the bilateral cerebellum, left parietal operculum cortex and right precentral gyrus in PDD relative to PD-NC ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). We did not find any significant VBM differences between people with DLB and PDD. See Supplementary Table 7 for the full list of regional VBM group differences.

We found widespread associations between atrophy and cognitive severity in Lewy body dementia, we found increasing atrophy with  increasing  cognitive  severity  in  the  bilateral  cerebellum and cingulate gyri, left middle and superior temporal gyri, left precentral gyrus, as well as the right angular and supramarginal gyri and right lateral occipital cortex ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). We also found atrophy increasing with increasing disease severity score (MDS-UPDRS) in the bilateral cerebellum and left occipital fusiform gyrus ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). In PDD, we found no associations with MDS-UPDRS, although we did find atrophy increasing  with  increasing  cognitive  severity  in  the  bilateral  temporal  fusiform cortex and superior parietal lobules, left angular, supramarginal, precentral  and  middle  temporal  gyri,  left  central  opercular cortex, right frontal orbital and paracingulate cortices and right temporal pole ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). Lastly, in DLB we found increasing atrophy with increasing cognitive severity in the right cerebellum, although no associations with disease severity ( P FWE &lt; 0.05). See Supplementary Table 8 for the full list of regional VBM regression analyses.

## Discussion

We used QSM to examine differences in brain magnetic susceptibility in Lewy body dementia and between Lewy body dementia subtypes.  We  found  significant  differences  in  QSM  values  between Lewy body dementia and both PD-NC and controls using voxel-wise analysis  throughout  the  brain.  When  comparing  Lewy  body  dementia subtypes, we found widespread increased QSM values in

A SNpr QSM vs disease severity in LBD

Table 2 Regional mean signed magnetic susceptibilities

| ROI                  | DLB ( n = 45)      | PDD ( n = 21)      | PD-NC ( n = 86)    | Controls ( n = 37)   | F-statistic   | Uncorrected P   | P FDR        |
| NBM                  | 0.14 (0.049)       | 0.16 (0.076)       | 0.14 (0.035)       | 0.15 (0.044)         | 2.14          | 0.10            | 0.20         |
| Globus pallidus      | 0.10 (0.023)       | 0.11 (0.029)       | 0.11 (0.020)       | 0.10 (0.022)         | 1.69          | 0.17            | 0.28         |
| Caudate              | 0.043 (0.022)      | 0.046 (0.030)      | 0.041 (0.017)      | 0.043 (0.013)        | 1.54          | 0.21            | 0.28         |
| Putamen              | 0.065 (0.030)      | 0.065 (0.049)      | 0.056 (0.021)      | 0.063 (0.017)        | 2.73          | 0.045           | 0.14         |
| SNPr                 | 0.035 ( 0.031)     | 0.065 ( 0.036)     | 0.046 ( 0.034)     | 0.038 ( 0.025)       | 7 . 25        | 0 . 00013       | 0.0016 a,b,c |
| SNPc                 | 0.12 (0.036)       | 0.13 (0.053)       | 0.12 (0.040)       | 0.11 (0.024)         | 2.96          | 0.034           | 0.14 b       |
| Thalamus             | - 0.0070 (0.0089)  | - 0.0045 (0.0043)  | - 0.0044 (0.0062)  | - 0.0031 (0.0049)    | 0.42          | 0.74            | 0.74         |
| Hippocampus          | - 0.0082 (0.0056)  | - 0.0081 (0.10)    | - 0.0071 (0.0074)  | - 0.0092 (0.0079)    | 0.82          | 0.48            | 0.52         |
| Insula               | - 0.0061 ( 0.0041) | - 0.0081 ( 0.0063) | - 0.0041 ( 0.0046) | - 0.0053 ( 0.0034)   | 6 . 01        | 0 . 00063       | 0.0038 b,d   |
| Medial orbitofrontal | - 0.0054 (0.0094)  | - 0.0081 (0.0060)  | - 0.0043 (0.0067)  | - 0.0068 (0.0084)    | 1.02          | 0.39            | 0.47         |
| Superior parietal    | 0.0027 (0.0050)    | 0.00085 (0.0051)   | 0.0017 (0.0046)    | - 0.00016 (0.0057)   | 2.55          | 0.058           | 0.14         |
| Lateral occipital    | - 0.0019 (0.0066)  | - 0.0048 (0.0063)  | - 0.0022 (0.0060)  | - 0.0010 (0.0076)    | 1.54          | 0.21            | 0.28         |

Median (IQR) of regional mean signed magnetic susceptibility (in ppm) by group. For the globus pallidus, insula and lateral occipital ROIs, mean (standard deviation) is presented as the mean QSM values were normally distributed in these regions. Normality of regional mean signed magnetic susceptibility (in ppm) were tested using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Group level comparison with ANOVAs are shown, FDR corrected for multiple comparisons. Bold signifies group differences that survived FDR correction for multiple comparisons. DLB = dementia with Lewy bodies; FDR = false discovery rate; IQR = interquartile range; PDD = Parkinson's disease dementia; LBD = Lewy body dementia; PD-NC = Parkinson's disease with normal cognition; NBM = nucleus basalis of Meynert; QSM = quantitative susceptibility mapping; ROI = region of interest; SNpr = substantia nigra pars reticulata; SNpc = substantia nigra pars compacta.

a Post hoc pairwise comparisons for significant regions Controls and PDD.

b Post hoc pairwise comparisons for significant regions PD and PDD.

- c Post hoc pairwise comparisons for significant regions PDD and DLB.

d Post hoc pairwise comparisons for significant regions PD and DLB.

Figure 5  Relationships between QSM values and disease severity in regions of interest. ROI mean QSM values significantly associated with disease severity (measured using total MDS-UPDRS score) in: ( A ) substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNpr) in LBD; ( B ) superior parietal cortex in PDD. Signed values are used in this analysis and results are adjusted for age and sex, with false discovery rate-corrected P -values presented. LBD = Lewy body dementia; PDD = Parkinson's disease dementia; QSM = quantitative susceptibility mapping; ROI = region of interest; SNpr = substantia nigra pars reticulata; total MDS-UPDRS = Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale total score.

PDD compared with DLB. These differences remained after correcting for atrophy, and we did not find similar differences between these groups when using a more conventional approach comparing brain volumes using VBM. We also showed increased QSM values associated with greater disease severity in several cortical regions in Lewy body dementia, suggesting QSM may have potential as a neuroimaging marker of disease activity in Lewy body dementia.

Our finding of widespread altered cortical QSM values in Lewy body  dementia  is  consistent  with  neuropathological  findings  of widespread cortical Lewy-related accumulations and Alzheimer's pathology. 4,40,41 Although cortical atrophy has been previously detected in Lewy body dementia using measures of volume or cortical thickness,  these  are  generally  not  consistent  across  studies. 42-44 The  widespread  QSM  increases  in  Lewy  body  dementia  versus other  groups  seen  here  suggest  that  neuroimaging  measures sensitive to changes in tissue composition and microstructure, rather than differences in volume or thickness, are likely to be more effective measures in distinguishing between Lewy body dementia subtypes.

We also showed clear positive relationships between QSM values and overall disease severity, measured using the MDS-UPDRS total score, though QSM values did not relate to cognitive performance. Conversely, while we did not find widespread atrophy associated  with  overall  disease  severity,  we  did  find  widespread associations between atrophy and cognitive severity in Lewy body dementia, as measured by VBM. Previous work examining QSM in PD,  including  our  own, 13,14 has  shown  a  relationship  between QSM  values  and  cognition  as  well  as  motor  severity  in  PD. However, we previously did not find concurrent associations between atrophy and cognition in PD. 13,14 There are several possible

B Superior Parietal QSM vs disease severity in PDD

reasons for the lack of association between QSM and cognition in Lewy  body  dementia.  Previous  work  showing  this  relationship was  only  at  earlier  stages,  in  PD  without  dementia,  and  higher QSM values may be a better indicator of early changes relating to cognitive  impairment.  In  Lewy  body  dementia,  where  patients have established dementia, additional changes in cognition may be better explained by measures other than QSM. There is also a higher likelihood of co-pathology at later disease stages. 45 It is not yet clear how the combination of tissue changes at this later disease stage contributes to the single bulk magnetic susceptibility measurement  provided  per  voxel  by  QSM.  Additional  measures  may help to disambiguate these tissue changes. 46,47

While increased iron bound in ferritin macromolecules is the greatest contributor to paramagnetic tissue susceptibility, 48,49 concurrent increases in the diamagnetic susceptibility contribution in the  same tissues may result in no net increase in susceptibility measured using QSM. For example, increases in diamagnetic metals such as copper, magnesium and calcium have also been observed  in  Lewy  body  diseases, 50,51 while  pathological  proteins would also be expected to have a diamagnetic susceptibility contribution as they contain a high number of paired electrons, 52,53 and together, this could lower the overall QSM value, even in a voxel with an increased ferritin level. Further, neurotoxic reactive oxygen species  produced  by  excess  tissue  iron  may  degrade  ferritin, 54 which could decrease the measured susceptibility value. Susceptibility has also been shown to be sensitive to microstructural changes in orientation. 55 The observation that QSM values related strongly to overall disease severity, does, however, indicate that it has relevance as a measure of tissue involvement. These results also suggest that, while QSM is more strongly associated with cognitive severity than atrophy in early-stage PD, 13,14 atrophy is  a  better  biomarker  for  cognitive  severity  in  late-stage  disease than QSM.

Previous studies have found grey matter reductions in posterior and parietal areas for patients with PDD and DLB. 56 Similarly, we found reductions in volume in the right precuneus. Additionally, we found a correlation between atrophy changes and cognitive severity in our VBM analysis. However, we did not find susceptibility changes in posterior and parietal areas in our QSM analysis in LBD, or any relating to cognitive severity. It is possible that QSM detects different  processes  than  those  detected  by  grey  matter  atrophy, and that this reflects the difference in the regional involvement seen between the two forms of analysis. It is  also  possible  that the atrophy itself affects the QSM values, in a more complex way than can be accounted for by TBV correction. 32 Future work could explicitly investigate the relationship between grey matter atrophy and QSM values in more detail.

We found more widespread cortical QSM value increases in PDD than DLB, even after correcting for atrophy. This was counter to our prediction that people with DLB would show higher QSM values than PDD, based on studies showing higher levels of beta-amyloid accumulation in DLB than PDD. 16 This finding may be due to a sampling effect, of particular differences in either our PDD or DLB cohort, and will need to be replicated in studies with larger patient numbers. The lower QSM values in DLB could also reflect differences in the cortical protein accumulations in DLB compared with PDD with differing diamagnetic properties. 52,53

Our ROI analysis showed an increase in QSM values in the SNpr in PDD compared with PD-NC, and even higher QSM values in PDD compared with controls, as well as a positive relationship between QSM values and disease severity in the SNpr. This is consistent with previous work showing increased QSM values in SN in PD 57 and with  disease  severity. 14 However,  our  ROI  analysis,  which  used signed, as opposed to absolute QSM values, did not show the diffuse cortical changes in Lewy body dementia compared with controls or PD that we had shown in our voxel-wise QSM analysis. This difference is likely to arise from the contribution of both paramagnetic and diamagnetic sources to the absolute QSM values in our voxelwise analysis. 14 Iron bound to ferritin is the key contributor to magnetic susceptibility and is paramagnetic. 48 However, there are several  diamagnetic  contributions  to  the  overall  susceptibility  and QSM values. These include metals such as calcium, magnesium and copper in some oxidation states. 49 Diamagnetic sources also include myelin, 58 which may be increased in some cortical regions in PD. 59 Pathological proteins such as alpha-synuclein, beta-amyloid and tau are also likely to be diamagnetic. 52,53

There are some limitations to consider in this work. The QSM values  reported  here  reflect  bulk  magnetic  susceptibilities  with contributions from both paramagnetic and diamagnetic sources. It  is  possible  for  these  different  sources  to  be  disambiguated,  if data  with  a  sufficient  number  of  echoes  (and  a  quantitative  T2 map) are acquired. 46,47 This  would  then  uncover  the  underlying sources by calculation of separate paramagnetic and diamagnetic susceptibility maps. However, this was not possible with our current dataset, and such approaches still require validation in large cohorts.

Our control group had not been prospectively collected, resulting  in  differences  in  age  and  sex  between  PD-NC  and  controls with Lewy body dementia. Although we had corrected for both of these factors in our analyses, it would be optimal to have demographically matched groups, especially considering that age contributes to QSM values. 60

Similarly, although people with PDD and DLB were matched in terms of duration of dementia, people with PDD had a longer overall disease duration, as dementia can emerge several years after a diagnosis of PD. Given the nature of PDD and DLB diagnostic criteria, patients can either be matched by overall PD duration or dementia duration. We matched for dementia duration given that this  more  closely  relates  to  the  patient's  clinical  condition,  and was more relevant to the comparison being conducted here between DLB and PDD. Future work could examine patients matched for overall Lewy body disease duration but this would remain challenging given that the association of disease duration with neuropathological 61 and  clinical  severity 62 is  complex,  with  some patients having shorter disease duration but a more severe clinical phenotype.

Our PDD sample, in particular, is small due to challenges in recruitment. We were able to find significant group-level differences in voxel-wise and regional QSM values suggesting that the study was  adequately  powered  in  this  regard.  However,  the  PDD  was too  small  to  detect  significant  correlations  between  QSM  values (both voxel-wise and regional) and disease severity measures.

Regarding our QSM acquisition, the consensus recommendation  is  to  acquire  multi-echo  as  opposed  to  single-echo  data, 26 as  this  allows  for  a  more  precise  calculation  of  the  underlying field shift, Δ B0, 63 and therefore yields more accurate susceptibility maps. Additionally, it should be noted that some structures where  we  report  findings,  notably  mesial  temporal  structures and  insular  cortex,  can  be  particularly  vulnerable  to  non-local susceptibility  artefacts  due  to  adjacent  bone,  air  and  vasculature.  Although  we  are  confident  that  our  optimized  QSM  pipeline  and  quality  control  protocol  minimize  these  effects  (see Supplementary  Fig.  1),  our  results  should  be  interpreted  with this in mind.

Finally, our findings are based on group-level analyses, but to be applicable in clinical practice, we will require information based on QSM measurements at an individual level.

## Conclusion

In summary, we show that QSM values are higher in Lewy body dementia than PD with normal cognition and higher in PDD compared with DLB. We found that QSM values increased with worse overall disease severity. These findings were seen in cortical areas, and also  in  the  SNpr.  Our  observations  suggest  distinct  underlying neurobiology in PDD compared with DLB, and demonstrate that QSM can detect brain changes relating to real-world clinical measures of disease severity in Lewy body dementia. Future work, applying  susceptibility  source  separation  methods  to  multi-echo gradient echo MRI data may show even greater sensitivity to clinical severity in Lewy body dementia.

## Data availability

Imaging and clinical data used in this study will be shared upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. All data and statistics generated from this study are presented in the manuscript and Supplementary data.

## Funding

This  research  was  supported  by  a  fellowship  from  Wellcome  to R.S.W. (225263Z/22/Z) and a PhD fellowship from Wolfson Foundation  and  Eisai  for  R.B.  It  was  also  supported  by  funding from Rosetrees Trust, Stoneygate Trust, the Association of British Neurologists and from the UCLH Biomedical Research Centre. A.Z. is supported by a fellowship from Alzheimer's Research UK.

## Competing interests

R.S.W.  has  received  speaking  and  writing  honoraria  from  GE Healthcare, Bial, Omnix Pharma, and Britannia; and consultancy fees from Therakind and Accenture. J.H.C. is a scientific advisor to, and shareholder in, Brain Key and Claritas HealthTech.

## Supplementary material

Supplementary material is available at Brain online.

## Table 1

| 0                                                                                                                | 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| LBD versus PD-NC versus Controls                                                                                 | χ 2 = 39.15 df = 2 P = 3.16 × 10 - 9a,b χ 2 = 23.23 df = 2 P = 9.03 × 10 - 6a,b W = 3288 P = 0.092 - χ 2 = 6.80 df = 2 P = 0.03 a,b χ 2 = 99.06 df = 2 P < 2.20 × 10 - 16a,b χ 2 = 102.13 df = 2 P < 2.20 × 10 - 16a,b χ 2 = 112.92 df = 2 P < 2.20 × 10 - 16a,b,c χ 2 = 94.20 df = 2, P < 2.20 × 10 - 16a,b,c W = 2360 P = 0.07 - |
| DLB versus PDD W = 580.5 P = 0.14 χ 2 = 0.60 df = 1 P = 0.44 W = 77 P = 3.90 × 10 - 8 W = 416.5 P = 0.43         | W = 471.5 P = 0.99 W = 432 P = 0.58 W = 348 P = 0.39 W = 296.5 P = 0.016 W = 327 P = 0.046 W = 113 P = 5.56 × 10 - 7 χ 2 = 12.45 df = 1                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Controls ( n = 37) 65.8 (9.0) 17/20 - -                                                                          | 17.5 (2.5) 28.6 (1.6) 0.00 (0.56) 8.3 (5.1) 4.8 (4.3) - -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| PD-NC ( n = 86) 63.6 (7.9) 41/45 4.2 (2.5) - 17.2 (2.8)                                                          | 28.1 (1.9) - 0.20 (0.73) 44.2 (21.3) 20.4 (14.2) 472.55 (252.88) -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| LBD ( n = 66) 71.9 (6.0) 8/58 4.3 (4.6) 2.1 (1.8)                                                                | 15.9 (3.4) 21.5 (5.0) - 2.65 (1.70) 71.3 (29.4) 36.0 (16.1) 425.98 (378.7) 46/20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| PDD ( n = 21) 70.5 (6.5) 4/17 8.7 (5.5) 1.9 (1.8)                                                                | 16.0 (3.6) 22.3 (3.9) - 2.33 (1.50) 83.1 (23.5) 40.6 (11.1) 773.33 (374.30) 8/13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| DLB ( n = 45) 4/41 2.2 (1.9) 2.2 (1.9)                                                                           | 15.9 (3.3) 21.2 (5.4) - 2.78 (1.77) 65.8 (30.4) 33.8 (17.6) 263.89 (252.63) 38/7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Demographics Age (years), mean (SD) 72.6 (5.6) Sex, F/M Diagnosis (years), mean (SD) Dementia (years), mean (SD) | Education (years), mean (SD) Clinical features MoCA, mean (SD) Composite cognitive score, mean (SD) MDS-UPDRS, mean (SD) MDS-UPDRS-motor, mean (SD) LEDD AChEIs medication, yes/no                                                                                                                                                 |

## Table 2

| 0                    | 1                  | 2                  | 3                  | 4                  | 5      | 6         | 7            |
|:---------------------|:-------------------|:-------------------|:-------------------|:-------------------|:-------|:----------|:-------------|
| NBM                  | 0.14 (0.049)       | 0.16 (0.076)       | 0.14 (0.035)       | 0.15 (0.044)       | 2.14   | 0.10      | 0.20         |
| Globus pallidus      | 0.10 (0.023)       | 0.11 (0.029)       | 0.11 (0.020)       | 0.10 (0.022)       | 1.69   | 0.17      | 0.28         |
| Caudate              | 0.043 (0.022)      | 0.046 (0.030)      | 0.041 (0.017)      | 0.043 (0.013)      | 1.54   | 0.21      | 0.28         |
| Putamen              | 0.065 (0.030)      | 0.065 (0.049)      | 0.056 (0.021)      | 0.063 (0.017)      | 2.73   | 0.045     | 0.14         |
| SNPr                 | 0.035 ( 0.031)     | 0.065 ( 0.036)     | 0.046 ( 0.034)     | 0.038 ( 0.025)     | 7 . 25 | 0 . 00013 | 0.0016 a,b,c |
| SNPc                 | 0.12 (0.036)       | 0.13 (0.053)       | 0.12 (0.040)       | 0.11 (0.024)       | 2.96   | 0.034     | 0.14 b       |
| Thalamus             | - 0.0070 (0.0089)  | - 0.0045 (0.0043)  | - 0.0044 (0.0062)  | - 0.0031 (0.0049)  | 0.42   | 0.74      | 0.74         |
| Hippocampus          | - 0.0082 (0.0056)  | - 0.0081 (0.10)    | - 0.0071 (0.0074)  | - 0.0092 (0.0079)  | 0.82   | 0.48      | 0.52         |
| Insula               | - 0.0061 ( 0.0041) | - 0.0081 ( 0.0063) | - 0.0041 ( 0.0046) | - 0.0053 ( 0.0034) | 6 . 01 | 0 . 00063 | 0.0038 b,d   |
| Medial orbitofrontal | - 0.0054 (0.0094)  | - 0.0081 (0.0060)  | - 0.0043 (0.0067)  | - 0.0068 (0.0084)  | 1.02   | 0.39      | 0.47         |
| Superior parietal    | 0.0027 (0.0050)    | 0.00085 (0.0051)   | 0.0017 (0.0046)    | - 0.00016 (0.0057) | 2.55   | 0.058     | 0.14         |
| Lateral occipital    | - 0.0019 (0.0066)  | - 0.0048 (0.0063)  | - 0.0022 (0.0060)  | - 0.0010 (0.0076)  | 1.54   | 0.21      | 0.28         |