
Published in partnership with the Parkinson ' s Foundation

Xi Luo 1 , Yanjun Liu 1 , Alexander Balck 2 , Christine Klein 2 &amp; Ronan M. T. Fleming 1,3

Many studies have reported metabolomic analysis of different bio-specimens from Parkinson ' s disease(PD)patients. However, inconsistencies in reported metabolite concentration changesmake it dif fi cult to draw conclusions as to the role of metabolism in the occurrence or development of Parkinson ' s disease. We reviewed the literature on metabolomic analysis of PD patients. From 74 studies that passed quality control metrics, 928 metabolites were identi fi ed with signi fi cant changes in PD patients, but only 190 were replicated with the same changes in more than one study. Of these metabolites, 60 exclusively increased, such as 3-methoxytyrosine and glycine, 54 exclusively decreased, such as pantothenic acid and caffeine, and 76 inconsistently changed in concentration in PD versus control subjects, such as ornithine and tyrosine. A genome-scale metabolic model of PD and corresponding metabolic map linking most of the replicated metabolites enabled a better understanding of the dysfunctional pathways of PD and the prediction of additional potential metabolic markers from pathways with consistent metabolite changes to target in future studies.

Parkinson ' s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder. Primarily as a result of an increasing elderly population, from 1990 to 2019, the number of patients with PD increased to almost 4 million globally 1,2 . As PD is a multifactorial disease with various molecular mechanisms, a series of biomarkers derived from clinical factors, neuroimaging, genomics, and biomolecules have been proposed for PD diagnosis and progression 3,4 .

Metabolites are small endogenous molecules generated by various enzymesinmetabolicreactions;theyjoininessentialcellular functions, such as energy metabolism, signal transduction and apoptosis 5 . Evidence has indicated that metabolites may provide insight into the mechanisms of various pathophysiological processes through dysfunctional metabolic pathways 6 . Therefore, an increasing focus of research identi fi es metabolites as signi fi cant biomarkers to distinguish PD patients from asymptomatic controls, and to predict the disease progression or prognosis of PD patients 7 .

Several studies have reviewed metabolic biomarkers of PD. These studies brie fl y summarized signi fi cant metabolites of PD from clinical and experimental studies 8 , reported advancements of analytical platforms used in metabolomic studies 9 , and concisely discussed current PD metabolic biomarker discovery and validation methods 10 . However, currently identifi ed PD metabolites are highly heterogeneous and segregated, these studies failed to identify the reproducibility of these metabolite changes in PD, and are not enough to comprehensively understand the signi fi cant metabolites and dysfunctional pathways of PD.

Human genome-scale metabolic modeling is increasingly used to understand normal cellular functions and disease states 11 -14 . It provides molecular mechanistic framework for integrative analysis of segregated molecular data, and quantitative prediction of phenotypic states 12 . Such models can be used to simulate whole-body metabolism and perform functional predictions based on cell-speci fi c metabolic models combined with omics data 14 -16 . To comprehensively understand the dysfunctional metabolic pathways of PD, it is necessary to effectively integrate reliable PD metabolites with genome-scale computational modeling.

In this study, we systematically reviewed the literature on the metabolomic studies of Parkinson ' s Disease patients. Then, we summarized the reported diagnosis-associated metabolites to reveal consistent and inconsistent metabolomic changes and analyzed possible reasons for inconsistency. Next, replicated metabolites were identi fi ed to explore the

1 School of Medicine, University of Galway, University Rd, Galway, Ireland. 2 Institute of Neurogenetics and Department of Neurology, University of Luebeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Luebeck, Germany. 3 Division of Systems Biomedicine and Pharmacology, Leiden Academic Centre for Drug Research, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands. e-mail: ronan.mt. fl eming@gmail.com

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-024-00732-z

## Identi fi cation of metabolites reproducibly associated with Parkinson ' s Disease via meta-analysis and computational modelling

Identification of studies via databases dysfunctional pathways of PD and generate a genome-scale metabolic model that is enriched with metabolic pathways containing PD-associated metabolites in order to put the metabolic perturbations associated with PD into a systems biochemical context. Consistently changed pathways and potential metabolic markers of PD were explored through the core map of the metabolic model. Records excluded:

## Results

## Study characteristics

As shown in Fig. 1, a total of 87 metabolomic studies of PD patients were selected, 81 of which were case-control studies and the remaining six reported longitudinal metabolomic analysis. Out of these six, only three longitudinal metabolomic studies identi fi ed potential progression-related metabolites. Due to the limited longitudinal metabolomic studies, we extended the de fi nition of progression-related metabolites to include metabolites associated with PD severity, motor score, and disease duration, or metabolites with changed abundances in follow-up cohorts. A comparison of progression-related metabolites between longitudinal and casecontrol studies was shown in Supplementary

All the selected studies were published from 2003 to March 2022, involving patients from 17 countries across the world (Fig. 2). These metabolomic studies utilized various bio-specimens, with plasma used in 39 studies, serum in 22 studies, cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) in 17 studies, brain tissue in six studies, urine in six studies, fecal in six studies, and other samples including sebum, saliva and human appendix in four studies.

The analytical platforms employed for metabolite measurement comprised liquid chromatography combined with mass spectrometry (LCMS) in 29 studies, LC-tandem MS in 23 studies, gas chromatography combined with mass spectrometry (GC-MS) in 15 studies, GC-tandem MS

Fig. 1 | Study selection diagram. The target metabolomic studies of PD were searched from databases until March 2021 and updated until March 2022. In this study, the diagnosis-related metabolites were considered as the metabolites with different abundances between PD patients and asymptomatic controls. Due to the limited number of longitudinal metabolomic studies, our de fi nition of progressionrelated metabolites has been expanded to include metabolites that are associated with PD severity, motor score, and disease duration, or metabolites with changed abundances in follow-up cohorts.

in three studies, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) in 12 studies, only MS in seven studies, electrochemical detection coupled with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC-ED) in three studies, liquid chromatography electrochemical array (LCECA) in two studies, Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) in two studies, and other platforms including immunoassay, electrode array, fl uorescence detection and enzyme test in six studies. The number of studies on each specimen and platform is shown in Fig. 3, most of these metabolomic studies chose to detect metabolomic pro fi les on blood samples, especially plasma, using liquid chromatography combinedwithmassspectrometryortandemmassspectrometry platforms.

## Quality assessment

The quality assessment results of QUADOMICS and Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) performed on 84 diagnosis-related studies are shown in Supplementary Table 2. Three independent progression-related studies did not perform quality assessment because they were not quali fi ed for the assessmentof QUADOMICS.According to the QUADOMICS results, the scores of 76 studies were higher than 7, and eight studies had scores below 8. According to the NOS results, the scores of 79 studies were higher than 6. Five studies had scores below 7, three of which belonged to low quality studies both in the QUADOMICS and NOS assessments. Combining the results of two tools, a subset of 74 diagnosis-related studies were deemed high-quality studies. Therefore, the diagnosis-related metabolites from 74studies and progression-related metabolites from 19/74 studies were used for further analysis. The schematic diagram of metabolites analysis in this study is shown in Fig. 4.

## Consistency of metabolites

As shown in Fig. 5a, a total of 928 diagnosis-related metabolites were identi fi ed, with 370 metabolites that were exclusively increased, 442

Fig. 2 | Study characteristics. a The number of studies of each year. b The involved countries of PD clinical studies.

Number of study of each specimen

Number of study of each platform

Fig. 3 | Detailed information on specimens and platforms. a Number of studies of each specimen. b Number of studies of each platform. The upset plot can visualize intersections between sets in the data matrix. Each specimen or platform corresponds to one set, and the study involved corresponds to the intersections. The size of the intersections is represented by bar charts aligned with the rows. The colored upset plot displays all the intersections involved in one set (specimen or platform) together, which facilitates the comparison between the sizes of individual sets, as the total study number of each set is easy to count, despite duplicating the columns. For example, the green color in the plots can easily help us to count the total study

metabolites that were exclusively decreased, and 116 metabolites that were identi fi ed with inconsistent changes in different studies. A total of 190 diagnosis-related metabolites were identi fi ed as replicated metabolites, with 60 consistently increased, 54 consistently decreased, and 76 inconsistently changed metabolites. We considered a metabolite to be replicated if it was found to be increased or decreased in more than one study, irrespective of the bio-specimen analyzed. Conversely, a metabolite to be non-replicated if it was reported to be increased or decreased in only one study, irrespective of the bio-specimen analyzed in that study. All diagnosis-related metabolites number involved in CSF or GC-MS. Abbreviations are as follows LC-MS liquid chromatography combined with mass spectrometry, LC-tandem MS liquid chromatography combined with tandem mass spectrometry, GS-MS gas chromatography combined with mass spectrometry, GC-tandem MS gas chromatography combined with tandem mass spectrometry, NMR nuclear magnetic resonance, HPLC-ED electrochemical detection coupled with high-performance liquid chromatography, LCECA liquid chromatography electrochemical array, MRS magnetic resonance spectroscopy, other immunoassay, electrode array, fl uorescence detection and enzyme test.

are displayed in Supplementary Table 3, and the number of involved studies and bio-specimen of replicated diagnosis-related metabolites are given in Supplementary Table 8. Most of the replicated metabolites only appeared in two studies (Fig. 5b). A computer program, ClassyFire (http://classy fi re. wishartlab.com/) was used to obtain the corresponding classi fi cation of metabolites 17 . The classi fi cation results indicated that the diagnosis-related metabolites of PD consisted of three inorganic compounds, including iodine, phosphate and potassium chloride, and 925 organic compounds. As shown in Fig. 5a, these organic compounds included 499 lipids, 69 of which
60.

were replicated; 189 organic acids, 55 of which were replicated; 66 organoheterocyclic compounds, 25 of which were replicated; 63 organic oxygen compounds, 16 of which were replicated; 45 benzenoids, 10 of which were replicated; 28 organic nitrogen compounds, eight of which were replicated; 35 other small class metabolites and seven of which were replicated. The progression-related metabolites of PD are shown in Supplementary Table 4. A total of 213 progression-related metabolites were identi fi ed, with 112 exclusively increased, 90 exclusively decreased, and 11 inconsistently changed metabolites. Only 14 metabolites were replicated, with eight consistently increased, fi ve consistently decreased, and one inconsistently changed metabolites.

## Cross-matching with metabolic models

To explore dysfunctional pathways of PD, all diagnosis-related metabolites, including the replicated and non-replicated metabolites, were crossmatched with the metabolites in two established metabolic models, a global human metabolic network model Recon3D (Recon3D\_3.01) 18 and a cell-type speci fi c model of dopaminergic neuronal metabolism (iDopaNeuroCT) 16 . Figure 5(c and d) displays the results of cross matching categorized by whether the metabolites were replicated or not, and whether they were consistently increased, consistently decreased, or inconsistently changed. The classi fi cation results of matched and unmatched metabolites are shown in Fig. 6.

Atotal of 311 metabolites were matched with metabolites in Recon3D, with 142 metabolites consistently increased, 74 metabolites consistently decreased, 95 matched metabolites with inconsistent changes. A total of 127 matched metabolites were replicated, with 45 consistently increased, 13 consistently decreased, and 69 inconsistently changed metabolites. Two inorganic compounds, iodine and phosphate, and 309 organic compounds canbematched.Thematchedorganiccompoundsincluded102lipids,32of which were replicable; 96 organic acids, 47 of which were replicable; 34 organoheterocyclic compounds, 14 of which were replicable; 28 organic oxygen compounds, 13 of which were replicable; 20 benzenoids, 9 of which were replicable; 17 organic nitrogen compounds, 7 of which were replicable; 8 nucleosides and 4 phenylpropanoids. The matched results with the bloodbrain barrier (BBB) metabolites shows that  BBB crossing metabolites and  BBB noncrossing metabolites could be matched. Of these matched metabolites, 27/34 BBB crossing metabolites were replicable and 3/13 noncrossing metabolites were replicable; the detail was shown in Supplementary Table 5.

A total of 153 metabolites were matched with the iDopaNeuroCT model, involving 65 organic acids and 35 lipids, with 61 consistently increased, 35 consistently decreased, and 57 inconsistently changed metabolites. A total of 75 matched metabolites were replicated metabolites, 22 of which were consistently increased, 8 of which were consistently decreased, and 45 replicated matched metabolites were inconsistently changed. All of these 153 metabolites could be found in the matched results with Recon3D.

The remaining 617 metabolites could not be matched with Recon3D, with 228 consistently increased, 368 consistently decreased, and 21 inconsistently changed metabolites. The presence of unmatched metabolites may be due to delays in updating the global human metabolism model. Therefore, it is necessary to add additional pathways to re fi ne the global human metabolic network and better understand the metabolic perturbations of PD. The human biochemical metabolic reactions of the unmatched metabolites, especially non-lipid replicated metabolites, were manually searched in literature and public databases. Of the 617 metabolites, 37 replicated and 26 non-replicated metabolites could be found within at least one metabolic reaction, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 2a. However, most of these new biochemical reactions could not form metabolic pathways, only caffeine metabolism was identi fi ed as associated with PD. Therefore, caffeine metabolism was used to re fi ne the global model.

As shown in Supplementary Fig. 2b, only 11 replicated progressionrelated replicated metabolites were matched with Recon3D, and eight replicated metabolites were matched with the iDopaNeuroCT model. Since
\_ All diagnosis-related metabolites

| Organic acids

| 3: 3 studies

| Replicated metabolites

1/2: 1/2 increased; 1/2 decreased

] 2/3: 2/3 increased; 2/3 increased

2/2: 2 increased: 2 decreased other frequency

Fig. 5 | Diagnosis-related metabolites of PD. a All diagnosis-related metabolites with different changes. b The number of studies of each frequency in different changes. c Cross-matched results with Recon3D and the dopaminergic neuronal

Fig. 6 | Organic compounds classi fi cation of PD diagnosis-related metabolites. a An overview of all organic compounds of PD diagnosis-related metabolites. b The organic compounds classi fi cation of the matched results with global human

cell-type metabolism model (iDopaNeuroCT). d The number of studies of matched results in different changes.

metabolism model (Recon3D). c The organic compounds classi fi cation of the matched results with the dopaminergic neuronal model (iDopaNeuroCT).

only a few progression-related metabolites were replicable, more progression-related metabolic studies of PD are needed. Therefore, further analysis was only based on diagnosis-related metabolites of PD.

To generally understand the metabolic perturbations of PD, the most signi fi cantly dysfunctional pathways in Recon3D, including lipid (fatty acid, sphingolipid, and bile acid) metabolism, amino acids metabolism (ornithine, glutamine, glycine, tyrosine, tryptophan, and other signi fi cant amino acids), purine metabolism, organic oxygen metabolism, and other perturbed metabolic pathways that not in the Recon3D were reviewed before PD model generation based on the involved replicated metabolites and their corresponding changes.

## Lipid metabolic pathways perturbed in PD

Evidence has established that lipids function as structural components, energymoleculesandsignalmessengersinlivingcells 19 , play important roles in many aspects of the pathogenesis of PD, ranging from oligomerisation and aggregation of α -Synuclein ( α -Syn) to mitochondrial dysfunction 20 . Below, we summarized several lipid pathways of PD, including fatty acid metabolism, sphingolipid pathway and bile acid metabolism.

Accumulating evidence indicates that fatty acid metabolism is dysfunctional in PD patients 21 -23 . Monounsaturatedfattyacids,suchasoleicacid, andpolyunsaturated fatty acids, including linoleic acid, arachidonic acid, and docosahexaenoic acid, are essential for maintaining neuronal membrane permeability and regulating brain in fl ammation 24 . Four studies identi fi ed decreased levels of oleic acid in the blood of PD patients 22,23,25,26 , while seven studies identi fi ed increased levels of polyunsaturated fatty acids 22,27 -32 , especially arachidonic acid 22,26,29 -31 in the plasma and CSF of PD patients. The weakerC-Hbondatthebis-allylicpositionmakesthese fatty acidsvulnerable to lipid peroxidation, and newly generated deleterious lipid peroxidation end products further in fl uence cellular functions by altering membrane structure and circulating lipids 33 . The structure of α -Syn can immediately change to a α -helical conformation in the presence of both arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid, which accelerates the aggregation of α -Syn and the formation of the oligomers that are harmful to neurons 24 .

The increase of acyl-carnitine metabolites 22,32,34,35 in PD patients may result from the defects in the carnitine transport system 36,37 and cause the dysregulation of fatty acid metabolism in PD patients 38 . For example, longchain fatty acids (LCFAs) are required to transport into the mitochondrial matrix; this transport is carnitine-dependent and involves active translocation machinery 36 . Therefore, the accumulation of long-chain fatty acids in the blood of PD patients, such as hexadecanoic acid and octadecanoic acid 32,36,39 , may result from decreased fatty acid beta-oxidation due to the dysfunctional mitochondria. In addition, the metabolism of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as valeric acid 38,40,41 and butyric acid 39 -42 , has been reported to be changed in the plasma and fecesof PD patients. SCFAs are the primary metabolites produced from dietary fi ber by the fermentation of gut bacteria; they have part of the effects on maintaining intestinal barrier integrity and gut mucosal immunity 40 .

Perturbations of sphingolipid pathways have been identi fi ed in several studies of PD 27,28,43 -45 . Sphingolipids are a kind of lipid containing a backbone of a sphingoid bases and aliphatic amino alcohols, including ceramides, sphingomyelins (SM), gangliosides, and cerebrosides; they are an integral part of cell signaling and regulation 21 . It has been reported that the perturbation of the sphingolipid pathway was an actual neurotoxic process following the aggregation of α -Syn 27,46 .

Sphingomyelin is a major myelin component that contains acyl chains with fatty acids; it is one of the constituents of the cellular membrane, and plays a role in in fl ammation, autophagy and cell death 43,45 . Several sphingomyelin molecules have been identi fi ed with increased 21,37,43,47 or decreased levels 27,28,37,45,48 -50 in the CSF and plasma of PD patients. Besides, the genetic variants of PD, especially SMPD1, a gene that encodes sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase and leads to the accumulation of sphingomyelin, have beenidenti fi ed as associated with increased SM 26:0 blood levels 51 . However, three studies reported decreased levels of SM 26:0 in the CSF 37 and plasma 44,45 of PD patients.

Glycosphingolipids, one of the products in the sphingolipid pathway, have been shown to regulate fundamental cell properties and biological functions such as cell adhesion, cell growth, cell proliferation, autophagy, apoptosis and senescence 52 . The decreased levels of glycosphingolipids have been found in the plasma of PD patients 27,28 . Due to the bioactive role in cell membranes, glycosphingolipids can regulate blood-brain barrier permeability through the ordered regions in biological membranes, such as lipid rafts, which can serve as a potent in fl ammatory process regulator 24 .

Bile acids are mainly synthesized from cholesterol in the liver, and participate in cholesterol homeostasis 38 . These bile acids play critical roles in the digestion and absorption of other lipids in the small intestine; they are closely associated with intestinal hormones, microbiota, and energy balance 37 . Three studies identi fi ed the increased level of unconjugated bile acids in the plasma of PD patients 9,38,53 , and two studies identi fi ed the increased levels of secondary bile acids in the plasma of PD patients, such as lithocholic acid and deoxycholic acid 32,54 . These bile acids play critical roles in the digestion and absorption of other lipids in the small intestine; they are closely associated with intestinal hormones, microbiota, and energy balance 37 . Besides, ursodeoxycholic acid and its derivatives, such as tauroursodeoxycholic acid and glycoursodeoxycholic acid, have been reported with lower levels in PD animal models 55 -57 . However, only one study reported decreased levels of glycoursodeoxycholic acid in the plasma of PD patients 38 , while another study reported increased levels of tauroursodeoxycholic acid in the plasma of PD patients 28 .

## Amino acids metabolic pathways perturbed in PD

Numerous amino acids signi fi cantly changed in different biospecimens of PD patients, and the most commonly changed amino acids are discussed, including ornithine, glutamine, glycine, tyrosine, tryptophan, and other signi fi cant amino acids metabolism.

Signi fi cantly increased levels of ornithine were observed in ten PD studies with different bio- fl uids, including blood, urine and CSF 22,42,44,45,50,58 -62 . Ornithine is derived from glutamine, synthesized from arginine and involved in the formation of urea 45 . The increased levels of ornithine mayrelate to the increased levels of urea 36,63 throughtheureacycle. Besides, the increased levels of proline were identi fi ed in the blood and urine in six studies 34,42,48,59,60,64 . Proline can also be generated from ornithine and glutamine 65 , establishing a tight association with these amino acids. The involved enzymes in proline metabolism, such as P5C reductases (PYCRs) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent P5C dehydrogenase (P5CDH), have been reported to play important roles in neuronal function and brain structure 42 . In addition, the dysfunctional metabolism of ornithine was related to the polyamine synthesis in PD patients 60 . Polyamines, such as putrescine, spermidine, N1acetylspermidine and spermine, participate in various biological processes such as cell proliferation, differentiation and division, and could act as antioxidant agents 66 . Increased metabolism of polyamines has been proposed to be due to high levels of oxidative stress in PD patients. Ornithine canbeconvertedtoputrescinebyornithinedecarboxylase,andfurtheraffect the metabolism of polyamines in PD patients 67 . The increased ornithine may result in an increased level of putrescine 37,62 and spermidine 35,62,68 .

Glutamine is the most abundant free amino acid; it has a critical role in mitochondria energy production, DNA damage response, apoptosis, and autophagy 69 . In PD patients, eight studies reported the increased levels of glutamine in the blood, urine and CSF 22,28,37,42,45,59,70,71 , while one reported decreased levels of glutamine in the CSF. Evidence indicates that glutamine can maintain the supply of neurotransmitter glutamate and gammaaminobutyric acid (GABA) through the glutamine-glutamate-GABA metabolic cycle in the brain 70,72 . Six studies identi fi ed decreased levels of glutamate in the blood and feces 22,71,73 -76 , while four studies identi fi ed increased levels of GABA in the plasma, urine and saliva of PD patients 34,35,73,77 . Normally, the released glutamate and GABA are taken up by astrocytes and rapidly converted to glutamine; these glutamines are then transported to the extracellular space and reabsorbed by glutamatergic and GABAergic neurons, where they are used to regenerate glutamate and

GABA 78 . The inconsistenly changed levels of glutamine and glutamate in the brain may act as a protection mechanism for neurons from glutamate excitotoxic injury after striatal dopamine depletion 70 . In addition, GABA canbegeneratedfromglutamatebytheenzymeglutamicaciddecarboxylase (GAD)intheneuron,butthisenzymeisalsofoundintheinsulin-secreting β cells in the pancreatic islets and further activating GABA receptors on the endocrine cells or immune cells 79 . Therefore, the increased levels of GABA in peripheral circulation may relate to in fl ammatory cell activation and immune dysregulation in PD patients 80 .

Six studies reported increased levels of glycine in the plasma, urine and CSF of PD patients 22,34,35,45,73,77 . As one of the inhibitory neurotransmitter amino acids 73 , glycine has been hypothesized to modulate the release of dopamine and glutamate 34,81 . Higher levels of glycine may indicate a neurotransmitter imbalance between dopaminergic and muscarinic cholinergic neurons 77 , and dopamine could induce glycine release from astrocytes to regulate neuronal excitability by reversing the function of astrocytic glycine transporter 81 . Moreover, glycine is involved in the synthesis of glutathione (GSHorgamma-glutamyl-cysteinyl-glycine) when combined with cysteine and glutamate 22 . Consistently increased glycine, glutamate and cysteine levels 22,59 may indicate the dysfunction of glutathione synthesis in PD 77 . Furthermore, several glycine derivatives, as a kind of minor metabolites of fatty acids, such as hexanoylglycine 32,34,35 , phenylacetylglycine 34,35 , tiglylglycine 34,35 , furoylglycine 34,35 , were identi fi ed with increased levels in the urine of PD, indicating the dysfunctional fatty acid beta-oxidation in the PD patients 34 .

Perturbation of the phenylalanine/tyrosine/levodopa pathway has been identi fi ed in several PD metabolic studies. Tyrosine is derived from phenylalanine and converted to levodopa through phenylalanine hydroxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase, and then synthesized dopamine by aromatic amino acid decarboxylase 42 . Ten studies identi fi ed increased levels of tyrosine in the blood, saliva, urine, fecal and CSF of PD patients 22,34,42,45,48,61,62,71,77,82 . This increased changes was consistent with the increased levels of a primary tyrosine breakdown product, hydroxyphenylacetic acid, in fi ve studies 27,28,34,35,83 . Eight studies reported increased levels of phenylalanine in the blood, saliva and urine of PD patients 34,38,42,50,71,77,84 , while three studies reported decreased levels of phenylalanine in the feces and serum of PD patients 22,74,85 . Both phenylalanine andtyrosineareprecursors of dopamine 34 . Since phenylalanine and tyrosine can cross the blood-brain barrier, the increased levels of phenylalanine and tyrosine in peripheral circulation may indicate impairment in dopamine synthesis 42 . The increased precursors may indicate that the dopaminergic neurons in the brain affected by PD are trying to compensate for the depletion of dopaminergic neurons 62 . This compensation leads to an increased tyrosine lateral metabolism, ultimately resulting in higher levels of tyramine 21,82 . Besides, increased levels of levodopa 8 and its metabolite, 3-methoxytyrosine (3-O-Methyldopa) 22,26,32,48,58,63,84 and dopamine 37,45 , were affected by antiparkinsonian medications, such as levodopa 48 . However, only one study showed signi fi cantly changed levels of tyrosine in the cerebrospinal fl uid of patients with PD 62 . More comprehensive studies of antiparkinsonian drugs are needed to explore the association with amino acids in the brain of PD patients. In addition, the increased levels of phenylacetylL-glutamine 22,34,35,49,86 , a phenylalanine derivative, was identi fi ed in the blood and urine of PD patients in fi ve studies. Phenylacetyl-L-glutamine was derived from phenylalanine through gut microbiota by decarboxylation and then conjugated with glutamine 87,88 . Therefore, the increased levels of phenylacetyl-L-glutamine are highly associated with the metabolism of phenylalanine and glutamine in PD, and re fl ect the high activity of gut microbiota in PD patients.

Four studies reported decreased levels of tryptophan in the blood, feces and CSF of PD patients 25,74,85,89 , while one study reported that the level of urinary tryptophan was signi fi cantly increased in early-stage PD patients 34 . Tryptophan was reported to be involved in the generation of NAD + 25 . The dysfunctional tryptophan metabolism has been found as associated with the impairment of brain energy metabolism 34,90 , which could induce increased oxidative stress in preclinical PD stage 25 . The increased or decreased tryptophan levels may be a result of the increased precursor degradation or excessive excretion of tryptophan in urine 48,74,89 . These changes can further lead to an increase or decrease in the corresponding catabolites, such as kynurenine 34,35,45 . Several studies have indicated that the imbalance of kynurenine metabolism plays an essential role in PD pathogenesis 45,83,91 . Kynurenineisadownstreammetaboliteoftryptophan,whichcanbefurther converted to 3-hydroxykynurenine or kynurenic acid 89 . Increased levels of kynurenic acid 89 and 3-hydroxykynurenine 83,91 have been identi fi ed in the blood of PD patients, indicating the increased kynurenine degradation. Besides, increased levels of 3-hydroxykynurenine may further lead to the depletion of dopamine neuons due to it is a neurotoxic compound that causes neuronal death 83 . In addition, based on the unmatched metabolites of PD, the products of kynurenine, 3- hydroxy-l-kynurenine 61 and aminobenzoicacid 34 , were identi fi ed with increased levels, while the other products of tryptophan, indoleacetylglutamine 32 and indolelactic acid 48 , were identi fi ed with decreased levels. These results emphasized the degradation of the kynurenine metabolism from tryptophan. Furthermore, tryptophan can also be degraded to 5-hydroxytryptophan 8,34,35,45 by tryptophan hydroxylase 8 . Both 5-hydroxytryptophan and acetyl-serotonin are involved in serotonin pathways, which synthesize the monoamine neurotransmitters serotonin and melatonin 35 .

Elevated levels of alanine were observed in the plasma and CSF of PD patients in fi ve clinical studies of PD 25,34,59,70,77 . Alanine can be synthesized from protein breakdown under fasting states, then transformed into pyruvate to synthesize glucose through gluconeogenesis in the liver 77 . The increased levels of alanine in PD patients may result from the dysfunction of the glucose-alanine cycle 59 , and affect the metabolism of Cori cycle 25,92 . The glucose-alanine cycle and the Cori cycle are crucial to gluconeogenesis and could increase glucose bioavailability in PD patients 92 . However, three studies identi fi ed the decreased levels of alanine in the plasma and CSF of PD patients 32,92,93 , two of which involved genetic PD patients, including PARK2 32 and LRRK2 92 PDpatients. The identi fi cation of speci fi c metabolic patterns is necessary for PD patients with different genetic mutations. In addition, increased levels of lysine were identi fi ed in the blood and urine of PD patients in four studies 34,44,59,71 , while decreased levels of lysine were identi fi ed in the plasma of PD patients in four studies 32,44,92,94 . The dysfunction of lysine in PD may relate to the dysfunction of polyubiquitin chain synthesis 95 or re fl ect the imbalance of lysine acetylation 96 .

Increased levels of the branched-chain amino acids, such as histidine 35,37,59,70,77 and isoleucine 23,34,35,37,42,59,70,77 were identi fi ed in several studies of PD. Branched-chain amino acids play an important role in synthesizing neurotransmitters and maintaining the balance of nitrogen between astrocytes and neurons. Increased levels of histidine were related to neuronal damage in PD since it plays an integral part in neuronal transmission 70 . Metabolism of isoleucine was important in energy production and synthesis of the neurotransmitter glutamate, acetyl-CoA and proteins 42,70 .

Four studies indicated decreased levels of pipecolic acid in the blood and CSF of PD patients 26,83,91,94 . Pipecolic acid can act as a neurotransmitter to modulate gamma-amino butyric acid transmission; it could be taken up by cerebral mitochondria and induce neuronal apoptosis 97 . Besides, pipecolic acid is also involved in normal brain functions through the gut-brain axis 98 . The increased levels of trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) 34,35,77,99,100 and p-Cresol sulfate 22,28 -30,48,77 in the blood, urine and CSF in PD patients may also re fl ect the dysfunction of gut-brain axis 99,101 .

## Purine metabolic pathways perturbed in PD

Metabolites involved in purine metabolism were identi fi ed with signi fi cant changes in different PD studies, including hypoxanthine, xanthine and uric acid. It was reported that uric acid is an endogenous antioxidant and end product of purine metabolism 102,103 , playing a role in protecting DNA from single-strand breaks caused by free radicals in alleviating oxidative damage in neurodegenerative diseases 104 . Hypoxanthine 34,35,53 and xanthine 32,53,90 are precursors of uric acid. Increased levels of hypoxanthine and xanthine may relate to the decreased levels of uric acid in PD patients 90,102 . The chronic

impairment of mitochondrial function may contribute to the increased xanthine levels 105 . This impairment leads to increasing oxidative stress and energy dysfunction in PD patients, which can enhance the release and degradation of adenosine and ATP, and further increased levels of xanthine 105 . Besides, dopamine depletion in the brain of PD patients might also in fl uence purine metabolism, resulting in increased levels of hypoxanthine and xanthine 106 . Besides, individuals consuming diets with increased serum uric acid have a lower risk of PD 107 . The inconsistent changes of purine metabolites may re fl ect the combined effects of endogenous and dietary factors 37,90 .

## Organic oxygen metabolic pathways perturbed in PD

The decreased levels of pantothenic acid in PD patients have been found in the plasma, serum, fecal and brain tissues of PD patients 23,48,58,83,108 . It was reported that pantothenic acid may associate with the neurodegenerative in fl ammation and oxidative stress in PD through the brain-gut axis 23 . However, metabolic modeling of the human gut microbiome predicted increased secretion of pantothenic acid in the human gut microbiota 13 , which is the converse of the changes in clinical studies of PD. Besides, pantothenic acid is a necessary precursor for coenzyme A (CoA) synthesis. CoAisacarbontransporter, required for pyruvate to be converted to acetylCoA before the citric acid cycle 23 . The decreased levels of pantothenic acid may re fl ect the energy dysfunction in PD patients 108 .

Energy dysfunction is highly related to the alterations in glucose metabolism in the pathogenesis of PD 109 . Increased levels of glucose 70,92,110 were identi fi ed in the blood and CSF of PD patients in three studies, while decreased levels 58,91 were identi fi ed in the plasma and CSF of PD patients in two studies. The energy requirements for metabolism in the brain are mainly glucose-dependent using NAD + . However, cellular NAD + levels declines during the ageing process 111 or due to the dysfunctional generation processes 25 , resulting in the decreased glucose utilization. Besides, increased glucose levels in blood are highly connected with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in PD patients 112 . The treatment with dopaminergic medication, such as levodopa, may relate to glucose tolerance, hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinaemia but this association still remains controversial 112,113 .

Perturbations in glucose metabolism have been further identi fi ed through several signi fi cant metabolites in PD, including mannitol, glucitol, lactate, acetone, and pyruvate. The dysfunctional glucose levels may relate to the increased 34,114 or decreased 59,75 pyruvate levels through glycolysis, and the increased 22,37,70 ordecreased 92 levels of lactate through the Cori cycle. Besides, the increased levels of mannitol 58,59 and glucitol 59,114 may imply the dysfunction of polyol metabolic pathways. The polyol pathway is a minor metabolic pathway of glucose running parallel to glycolysis, whose activity is altered in mitochondrial dysfunction 114 . Moreover, four studies found increased levels of acetone in serum, CSF and brain tissue of PD patients 37,50,70,71 . Acetone is a product formed from acetoacetic acid during fatty acid beta-oxidation 70 . Increased fatty acid beta-oxidation metabolism in the brain may be used as a compensatory energy metabolism in PD 71 .

## Other perturbed metabolic pathways not present in Recon3D

Based on the unmatched replicated metabolites, caffeine metabolism was identi fi ed as dysfunctional in several studies. Caffeine is a natural chemical compound with stimulant effects 115 . It is contained in coffee, tea, and cocoa, and is widely used in various energy drinks and medical products. Once the caffeine has been ingested, it is quickly absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract, andthebloodconcentrationsofcaffeinearehighest 30 min after ingestion 116 . Asimilar trend in caffeine concentration is found in the brain, which means that caffeine can be transferred from blood to the brain through the rapid crossing of the blood-brain barrier due to its hydrophobic characteristics 115 .

Several studies have reported decreased levels of caffeine and its downstream metabolites 32,58,103,117,118 in the blood of PD patients. One study 103 indicated that reduced levels of caffeine in PD patients may partly result from PD patients consuming signi fi cantly less caffeine compared to healthy controls. However, in other studies 58,83,106,118 , the lower levels of caffeine and its decomposition products in PD patients were identi fi ed with no association with caffeine consumption in participants after adjusting for coffee intake 58,106 .

Caffeine is a known antagonist of adenosine A2A receptors 118 . Adenosine A2A receptors are highly expressed in the basal ganglia and the limbic brain region, which tightly interacts structurally and functionally with the dopamine D2 receptor to modulate the function of movement 119 . The activity of Adenosine A2A receptors may associate with pathogenic processes in neurodegenerative illnesses, such as excessive glutamate release, the aggregation of toxic protein species, activation of the indirect pathway of the cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical loop and disrupting the redox homeostasis 120,121 . The effects of caffeine in the substantia nigra could be competitive inhibition with adenosine binding to adenosine A2A receptors.

Moreover, the Cytochrome P450 enzymes, such as Cytochrome P450 Family1SubfamilyAMember2(CYP1A2)andCytochromeP450Family1 Subfamily E Member 1 (CYP2E1), are involved in the caffeine metabolic pathway, which can affect the ef fi ciency of caffeine metabolism 32 . However, the prevalence of single-nucleotide polymorphism of CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 has no difference between PARK2 patients and control subjects 32 . Besides, it was dif fi cult to exclude the possible in fl uence of drug therapy, such as levodopa or other antiparkinsonian drugs that in fl uence the collateral hypermetabolism of caffeine 117 . More independent studies are needed to explore the therapeutic potential of caffeine for PD treatment.

Other four unmatched replicated metabolites, including trigonelline, catechol sulfate, pyroglutamine and homovanillate sulfate, indicated that the metabolic changes of PD were also involved in drug metabolism, food metabolism, protein degradation, and gut microbiota metabolism in PD patients.

Trigonelline or N-methyl nicotinic acid, a non-purine constituent in coffee that serves to produce speci fi c aroma compounds, was identi fi ed with lower levels of concentration in the plasma of PD 32,48,63,103 . The decreased levels of trigonelline indicated that there was a difference in coffee intake between PD patients and healthy controls. It was reported that trigonelline could be partially transformed into nicotinic acid during the roasting process, form into vitamins and be involved in human metabolism 122 . Besides, the pharmacological activities of trigonelline have been explored in central nervous system disease, especially its neuroprotective effects 123,124 . The biochemical reactions of trigonelline in humans need to be further explored.

Catechol sulfate is an end product of the metabolism of benzoate metabolism 125 . The biological pathway of catechol sulfate in PD patients is currently unclear. The decreased levels of catechol sulfate may be associated with abnormal gut microbiota in PD patients 32,58,125 ; it has been reported to be involved in the combined activity of gut microbial metabolism and liver and kidney functions such as constipation and dysphagia 58 .

Pyroglutamine, a cyclic derivative of glutamine involving glutamine metabolism 126 , belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alpha amino acids and derivatives. Two studies reported increased levels of pyroglutamine in the blood of PD patients 22,58 , which may relate to the dysfunctional glutamine metabolism of PD. Besides, the research on the association between antihypertensive and lipid-lowering drugs with human metabolism indicated that the increased levels of pyroglutamine were positively associated with the concentration of beta-blockers, but negatively associated with fi ber intake 127 .

Increased levels of homovanillate sulfate were reported in two studies 32,58 . Homovanillate sulfate or homovanillic acid sulfate, a primary metabolite of catecholamine metabolism, is located downstream of the levodopa metabolite, which was associated with levodopa intake and affected by the metabolism of levodopa medication 58 . Besides, some phenolic acids, such as caffeic acid, and vanillic acid, are found in the outer bran layer of wheat grains 128 . The increased levels of homovanillate sulfate may br associated with the metabolic conversion of wheat grains dietary by microbial enzymes or endogenous enzymes in the liver 128 .

## PD model

Considering the wide range of metabolism dysfunctions observed in PD patients, a PD model was then generated to gain a comprehensive

Glycine, serine, alanine, and threonine metabolism -

understanding of these metabolic connections. To better describe the metabolic perturbations of PD, additional human metabolic reactions were added to generate a re fi ned global model, Recon3.02, which contains 4,213 metabolites and 13,950 reactions, including all reactions from Recon3D, 277 new reactions from Human1 129 , 14 reactions from the iDopaNeuroCT model, 73 fatty acid oxidation reactions and 43 caffeine metabolism reactions, with all the additional metabolites and reactions listed in Supplementary Table 6 and 7. Starting with Recon3.02, a de-compartmentalized and thermodynamically fl ux-consistent global subset was generated to represent a generic model that not speci fi c for any cell types or bio-specimens, containing 2828 metabolites and 5602 reactions. Of 137 replicated metabolites, 8 were excluded as they did not correspond to any thermodynamically consistent network fl ux. These excluded metabolites belonged to gut microbiota metabolites, such as trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), p-Cresol sulfate, p-Cresol, glutaric acid and indoxyl sulfate. The remaining 129 metabolites were designated as core metabolites to build a functional network around using an established model generation pipeline, XomicsToModel 130 .

An ensemble of models was generated containing 1689 shared reactions (except for newly added exchange reactions) and 129 core metabolites. The heat maps for overlapped metabolites, reactions and genes between the randomly generated 10 models are shown in Supplementary Figure 2; the overlapped proportion for metabolites, reactions and genes between each pair of models can reach ˜ 90%. Then, the genome-scale metabolic PD model was extracted using the shared reactions, which contained 1689 reactions, 910 metabolites, and 808 metabolic genes, involving 82 subsystems. We ordered the subsystems according to the proportion of the core metabolites out of all 129 core metabolites contained in each subsystem, and the top 20 subsystems are shownin Fig. 7. Most of the signi fi cant pathways related to the replicated metabolites were visualized in a planar map ignoring the exchange reactions, which can help us to better understand the relationships between the replicated and non-replicated metabolic changes in PD, as shown in the Supplementary

Since most of the metabolites were performed with inconsistent changes, the pathways with consistently changed metabolites were identifi ed through the map and highlighted in the Fig. 8, including dopamine metabolism (tyrosine metabolism), polyamine metabolism (urea cycle), steroid metabolism and caffeine metabolism.

## Discussion

Of 84 studies reviewed in total, 10 diagnosis-related studies were omitted from further consideration as they scored below thresholds following externally speci fi ed quality control assessments, speci fi cally QUADOMICS 131,132 and the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale 133 . In the QUADOMICS results, most below-threshold studies did not provide a detailed description of sample inclusion and exclusion criteria; they failed to control potential factors affecting the metabolomic pro fi les during sample collection or they were unable to perform validation in an independent cohort. In the NewcastleOttawa Scale results, below-threshold studies were undermined by sample selection bias, such as hospital admission rate bias, failure to describe the source of control samples, or failure to control additional factors besides age and sex between cases and controls.

Metabolites reported to be changing in PD were matched with the metabolites of established human computational models 18 . However, it was dif fi cult to match many of the reported lipids due to differences between the level of resolution and annotation of lipids in the human metabolic model andinthelipidomicdata 134 . For example, triglycerides (TGs) are a lipid class that is composed of a large number of lipid molecules with different structures. For lipidomic data, classes such as TG (52:2), or species such as TG(17:017:218:0)orTG(17:117:118:0),couldonlybemappedtoanentity in the model ( ' tag\_hs ' ) that represents a lipid class rather than a lipid with a uniquely speci fi ed structure. Therefore, further re fi nement of lipid metabolism in the metabolic model and more detailed speci fi cations of the lipids measured in clinical samples is necessary before computational modeling can be used to interpret PD-associated lipidomic changes.

According to the de fi nitions of replicated and non-replicated metabolites, around 20% of PD diagnosis-related metabolites were replicated. Most non-replicated metabolites were lipids, which may be because lipids have complex structures that are dif fi cult to analytically identify as the same metabolite with different platforms. In this study, the statistics of replicated metabolites are irrespective of the biospecimen being analyzed due to a considerable number of metabolites could be converted to non-replicated metabolites if we split biospecimens. Indeed, most studies employed different metabolomic platforms, which resulted in diverse metabolomic pro fi les. Besides, it is worth noting that most studies do not report measured but unchanged metabolites. Instead, they focus on reporting signi fi cantly changed metabolites identi fi ed through their statistical method. Consequently, a metabolite is not deemed non-replicated based on being only increased or decreased once in one speci fi c biospecimen cause it could be reported with the same changes in different biospecimens. These altered metabolites are still considered to be replicated in this study and could be validated in future metabolomic studies.

5-Acetylamino-6-formylamino-3-methyluracil

5-Acetylamino-6-amino-3-methyluracil

Phenylalanine metabolism henylalanine

Fig. 8 | The overview map related to the replicated metabolites and four consistent pathways. Each disc represents a metabolite with non-white colors representing metabolites associated with PD diagnosis, with different changes and degree of replication, while white disks represent metabolites that have not been reported to be associated with PD diagnosis (non-diagnosis related metabolites). Non-diagnosis

Besides, almost one-third of replicated metabolites were inconsistently changed across different studies. One of the reasons for this inconsistency may be caused by various bio-specimens of included metabolomic studies. For example, taurocholic acid was considered a large molecule that cannot cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). The inconsistent changes in taurocholic acid, including increased levels in plasma 28,48 and decreased levels in CSF 37 , may be caused by the natural barrier. Besides, pathological changes in the permeabilityof the BBB may contribute to changes in metabolite levels, such as several triacylglycerols and derivatives, which are BBB impermeable metabolites but identi fi ed with increased levels in both plasma and CSF of PD patients 21,43,135 .

Inconsistency may also arise due to drug intake, as certain metabolites, such as ornithine and putrescine, can be in fl uenced by antiparkinsonian drugs (Alexander B et al., in preparation). Genetic mutations are also known to be a signi fi cant contributing factor to this inconsistency, as the concentration of several long-chain fatty acids are known to be in fl uenced by GBA mutations 25 . Use of different analytical platforms or different sample preparation procedures may also lead to reports of inconsistent changes in metabolite levels. Reduced and elevated levels of plasma lysine were identi fi ed in the same study using nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometryplatforms,respectively 44 . Pre-analytical variation in human plasma and serum may also contribute to inconsistencies 136 . For example, the level of several metabolites including hypoxanthine, guanosine, inosine and eicosanoids may change as a function of time interval between sampling and centrifugation 136 .

In addition, disease progression may also result in inconsistencies. For example, methionine and leucine were identi fi ed as signi fi cantly changed in concentration over time in the plasma of PD patients 84 ; their concentrations werehigherinPDcomparedtothecontrolsatbaselinebutthendecreasedto be lower than the controls at follow-up 84 . This change may result from the changedlevels of the precursor by oxidative stress or gut microbial pathways during PD progression 84 . Due to the limited progression-related studies,

non diagnosis-related decreased non-replicated

increased non-replicated inconsistent non-replicated

related metabolites are juxtaposed to many metabolites that are diagnosis-related and hypothesized to be relevant to the pathogenesis of PD, especially if they are not generally targeted by established metabolomic platforms. Zoom in to view details of additional metabolic pathways.

especially longitudinal metabolomic studies, we did not draw any conclusions on progression-related metabolites. However, we do conclude that additional longitudinal studies of PD metabolism are warranted.

In general, the low percentage of replication and consistency revealed that reported biomarkers are highly heterogeneous. This heterogeneous picture may result from complex factors affecting metabolite levels, such as different ethnicity, diet, exercise levels and medication intake, different metabolite annotation databases and statistical analysis methods used in different metabolic studies. Merging different subtypes of PD patients, different detection platforms and bio-specimens, may also contribute to such heterogeneity. To better understand common dysfunctional pathways of PD, we assumed that the replicated metabolites were more reliable biomarkers than other non-replicated metabolites in this study. As more precise PD metabolomic studies are conducted in the future,these replicated metabolites can be updated accordingly.

The identi fi ed replicated, diagnosis-related metabolites were used to specify core metabolites of the newly generated, PD-speci fi c metabolic model. The semi-automated model generation process biased for inclusion of pathways that enabled steady-state fl ux involving PD-associated metabolites but relaxed this requirement for highly connected metabolites that were not associated with PD. Therefore, the PD model focuses on PDassociated pathways rather than pathways for synthesis and degradation of non-PD-related metabolites that are omnipresent in metabolism. As a result, pathways associated with PD were included in the model, while pathways for cofactor synthesis were excluded, unless that cofactor was associated with PD.

The metabolic subsystems enriched in the PD model were broadly re fl ective of the dysfunctional pathways summarized in the literature synthesis. Most signi fi cant metabolic pathways in PD model are primarily involved in six pathways: (1) Tyrosine metabolism. It contained 14 replicated metabolites, fi ve of which are highly replicated. The highly replicated metabolites are metabolites that appeared in more than three studies with

The metabolic map related to the replicated metabolites

the same changes. These highly replicated metabolites included 3-OMethyldopa, glycine, tyrosine, hydroxyphenylacetic acid and glutamine. (2) Caffeine metabolism. It contained 10 replicated metabolites, with six highly replicated metabolites, caffeine, paraxanthine 32,58,103,117,118 , 1-methylxanthine 32,83,103,117,118 , theophylline 32,58,83,93,103,117,118 , 1,7-dimethyluric acid 32,58,117,118 and 5-acetylamino-6-amino-3-methyluracil 32,58,83,117,118,137 . (3) Tryptophan metabolism. It contained nine replicated metabolites, four of which were highly replicated, including 5-hydroxytryptophan, glutamate, tryptophan and alanine. (4) Phenylalanine metabolism. It contained nine replicated metabolites, six of which were highly replicated, including glycine, glutamine, phenylacetyl-L-glutamine, hydroxyphenylacetic acid, phenylalanine and glutamate. (5) Lysine metabolism. It contained eight replicated metabolites, fi ve of which were highly replicated, including glycine, glutamate, pipecolic acid, acetate 40,42,71,77,100,113,114 and lysine. (6) The urea cycle. It contained eight replicated metabolites, three of which were highly replicated, including ornithine, glycine and acetate. These pathways re fl ecting the dysfunctional metabolism in PD patients are mainly related to the neurotransmitter metabolism and caffeine metabolism.

Except for these pathways involving highly replicated metabolites, other pathways with consistent metabolic changes in the map, including steroid metabolism, polyamine metabolism and dopamine metabolism, could be used to explore potential metabolic markers further. Dysfunction of steroid metabolism was identi fi ed with cortisol and its related metabolites, including cortisone, 11-deoxycortisol, 17-hydroxyprogesterone and 21Deoxycortisol, increased in PD patients 22,34,35,48 . Stress-sensitive cortisol, produced by the adrenal cortex, may affect motor and non-motor symptomsofPD 138 . Increased stress in the neurodegenerative process may induce the dysfunctional hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and further in fl uence cortisol levels; the increased cortisol levels may relate to mitochondrial dysfunction and the vulnerability of nigral neurons 139,140 . Besides, the dysfunction of sphingolipid metabolism may affect steroidogenesis metabolism 46 . Sphingolipids are strongly connected with sterol metabolism through the physical association of the planar ring of sterols with the acyl chains of sphingolipids; they may interact through the cross-talk on metabolic path- ways, resulting in increased steroid levels 141 . Therefore, cortisol and its related metabolites could have the potential to be the biomarkers to re fl ect dysfunctional lipid metabolism and the stress in the brain leading to the disruption of mitochondrial function and neuroin fl ammation 140 .

As shown in the map, putrescine and its downstream metabolites, including spermidine, 4-Aminobutanal 94 and N-acetylputrescine 68,94 , were identi fi ed with increased levels in PD patients. Meanwhile, the lateral metabolism from spermidine to N1-acetylspermidine 68 , N8acetylspermidine 68 increased in PD patients, while the metabolism from spermidine to spermine was identi fi ed to be decreased 68 . These consistently changed polyamines could be used as potential biomarkers to re fl ect oxidative stress in PD; and the decreased metabolism from spermidine to spermine and its involved protein activity needs further exploration.

The PD model re fl ects the classical biosynthesis and degradation pathways of dopamine, where dopamine comes from phenylalanine/tyrosine/L-Dopa, and then degrades to norepinephrine or homovanillic acid 142 . One of the direct dopamine products, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL), has been reported to accumulate in the brain of PD patients through the increased dopamine conversion to DOPAL by monoamine oxidase and decreased DOPAL degradation by aldehyde dehydrogenases, which may play an important role in the aberrant accumulation of α -Syn 143 . However, our study was limited to analyzing most of the metabolomic studies of PD patients. Hence, other relevant studies, such as the paper to explore the dysfunction of catechols in PD patients 144 were not included, leading to the insigni fi cance of DOPAL in our study. Therefore, more studies are needed to focus on the dopamine metabolites in the brain of PD patients. In contrast, the intermediate dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), which is also the product of DOPAL, was consistently reported with decreased changing levels, and plays an important role in several biological processes 145 . Both norepinephrine 73,82 and dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) 73,146 were consistently decreased in PD patients no matter whether the dopamine level was increased or decreased. Therefore, norepinephrine and dihydroxyphenylacetic acid could be used as potential markers to identify the loss of dopaminergic neurons 145 .

Except for the highly replicated metabolites in caffeine metabolism, other caffeine downstream metabolites, including theobromine, 1,3,7-trimethyluric acid, 7-methylxanthine and 5-acetylamino-6-formylamino-3methyluracil, may also be considered as possible metabolic markers to re fl ect the dysfunction of caffeine metabolism as they are consistently decreased in PD patients.

In conclusion, our analysis limited metabolic perturbations associated with all PD patients, without distinguishing between genetic and idiopathic, treated versus untreated, or other subtypes of PD patients. Different subtypes of PD patients may result in perturbation to different subsets of the pathways associated with PD. Additional strati fi cation analysis based on different subtypes of PD, different bio-specimens and metabolomic detection platforms would be possible with consistent access to raw data for each of the 74 studies that passed quality control assessments. A more detailed analysis of all of the individual raw metabolomic data and metadata from high-quality past and ongoing clinical metabolomic studies will be necessary to enable a paradigm shift from mono to multi-centric clinical metabolomic analysis of PD. Moreover, more longitudinal metabolomic studies are needed to explore the metabolic changes in PD progression.

Given that the metabolic biomarkers in PD patients are signi fi cantly impacted by various factors, it is necessary to avoid potential biases and control such factors in future PD metabolomic studies. When designing the metabolite detection method, careful consideration is required, as different detection platforms exhibit different sensitivity and separation power for different metabolites. Besides, inherent barriers may lead to inconsistent metabolic changes in PD patients across different bio-specimens, and dynamic metabolite changes may occur before sample centrifugation. Therefore, the adoption of standard analytical techniques and sample preparation operations are needed to be able to more precisely compare metabolomic studies. Additionally, it is essential to consider the different metabolomicchangingpatternsinvariousPDpatientclassi fi cations, such as genetic or idiopathic PD patients, early- or late-stage PD patients, treated anduntreatedPDpatients,duetosomemetabolitesmaychangeovertimeat different stages or be in fl uenced by antiparkinsonian drugs. Also, the selection of an appropriate control group is crucial in obtaining accurate results, taking into account factors such as age onset or the impact of daily diet. Moreover, several metabolites have highlighted gut microbiota changes in PD, and further research is necessary to elucidate the association between the gut-brain axis and PD.

## Methods

## Study search and data collection

Metabolomic studies of PD were selected till March 2021 from two public databases, PubMed and Web of Science, with the combination of search keywords ' Parkinson ' s disease ' and ' Metabolomics ' in all fi elds. The studies based on all PD patients, including genetic and idiopathic, treated and untreated PD patients, were included in this study. No limitations were placed on analytical platforms and bio-specimens used in PD metabolomic studies. The following studies were excluded: studies that only concerned cell culture, animal models and drug therapy; 2) review papers; 3) studies without any diagnosis-related or progression-related metabolites. Then, the target metabolomic studies of PD were updated from March 2021 to March 2022 to extend the study number.

In this study, the diagnosis-related metabolites were considered as the metabolites with different abundances between PD patients and asymptomatic controls. Due to the limited number of longitudinal metabolomic studies available, our de fi nition of progression-related metabolites has been expandedto include metabolites that are associated with PD severity, motor score, and disease duration, or metabolites with changed abundances in follow-up cohorts. Basic information, including publication year, country, sample size, analytical platforms of metabolites, type of specimen, and possible diagnosis-related or progression-related metabolites with increased

Table 1 | The example of the replicated and non-replicated metabolites in this study

| Metabolites             | VMH ID   |   Increased_Frequency |   Decreased_Frequency | Replicated or Non-replicated    |
|-------------------------|----------|-----------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------|
| Tyramine                | tym      |                     2 |                     0 | Replicated (consistently)       |
| Glycerophosphocholine   | g3pc     |                     0 |                     2 | Replicated (consistently)       |
| Uridine                 | uri      |                     1 |                     3 | Replicated (inconsistently)     |
| Ubiquinone-1            | q10      |                     0 |                     1 | Non-replicated (consistently)   |
| cholate                 | cholate  |                     1 |                     0 | Non-replicated (consistently)   |
| Sphinganine 1-phosphate | sph1p    |                     1 |                     1 | Non-replicated (inconsistently) |

or decreased changing trends compared to controls were collected from each selected study.

To assess the reliability of the included results, the quality assessment of selected studies was applied by combining the tools Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) 133 and QUADOMICS 132 . Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) is widely used for assessing the quality of non-randomized studies in metaanalyses 133 . It consisted of three parts: sample selection, comparability, and outcome with 9 questions. Each question can be awarded 1 score if it is ' yes ' , and each study can get a maximum of 9 scores. The studies that scored greater than 6 were considered to be relative high-quality 147 .

QUADOMICS, a quality assessment panel speci fi ed for the ' omics ' -based diagnostic research, was generated from Quality Assessment tool for Diagnostic Accuracy Studies (QUADAS) 131,132 . Except for the assessment of study design, this tool was also focused on sample collection, pre-analytical and analytical procedures, and statistical analysis. In this study, the 10/16 questions related to metabolomic were selected to assess the quality of PD metabolomic studies 148 . Each item is quanti fi ed as 1 score if it is ' yes ' , and each study can get a maximum of 10 scores. The studies that scored greater than 7 were considered to be relatively high-quality. Any study that was assessed as high-quality by both tools was deemed a high-quality study. A random subset with eight studies was assessed by an independent clinical research fellow to validate the quality assessment consistency. Any disagreementontheseassessmentitems wasdiscussed to establish a consensus.

## Metabolite classi fi cation and matching to human metabolic databases

Ascollected metabolites were representedby different identi fi ers in different studies, for example, a metabolite may be reported as butyric acid in a clinical metabolomic study but butyrate in another study, a Virtual Metabolic Human identi fi er (VMH ID) was used to unify metabolite into a single namespace.

The Virtual Metabolic Human (VMH, https://www.vmh.life/) is a metabolic database linking genes, reactions and metabolites into human metabolic models, where each metabolite is identi fi able with database dependent and independent identi fi ers 148 . It is necessary to identify the corresponding VMH ID for each metabolite to explore the metabolic pathways involved, as the VMH namespace is commonly used for each of the established metabolic models.

Uncertainmetabolites, including fragments that could not be identi fi ed or annotated accurately, were excluded from this study. Then, the classi fi cation of each metabolite was obtained to identify the metabolite characteristics. A computer program, ClassyFire (http://classy fi re.wishartlab. com/) 17 , which uses chemical structures and structural features to automatically assign all known chemical compounds to taxonomy, was used to obtain the corresponding classi fi cation through the InChI string and InChI key that was collected from the VMH database for each metabolite. The metabolites without InChI string and InChI key, especially lipids, were manually classi fi ed to the closest parent class.

Statistical analysis for the metabolites with different changes was performed to explore the consistency and inconsistency of PD metabolites. As the example shown in Table 1, we de fi ned the replicated and non-replicated metabolites with consistent and inconsistent changes. A metabolite is considered to be replicated when it has been reported to be increased (or decreased) relative to controls in more than one study. We de fi ne a metabolite to be consistent when it has only been reported to increase (or decrease) in all involved studies, while a metabolite to be inconsistent when it has been reported to increase and decrease in different studies. Therefore, a metabolite is consistently replicated when it is only reported to increase (or decrease), while inconsistently replicated when it is reported to increase (or decrease) in more than one study but decrease (or increase) in at least one study. In this study, each of these de fi nitions is irrespective of the type of biospecimen where the changes were reported, therefore a metabolite could be replicated if it was reported to increase in one study of plasma samples and another study of CSF samples.

As the blood-brain barrier (BBB) can prevent the transportation of some molecules, 43 known metabolites that can cross the BBB and 240 known metabolites that cannot pass the BBB, were matched with the collected metabolites of PD 14,135 . Besides, all collected metabolites were crossmatched with the metabolites in two established computational models using VMH ID, the global human metabolism model (Recon3D or Recon3D\_3.01) 18 and the dopaminergic neuronal cell-type metabolism model (iDopaNeuroCT model) 16 to explore existed dysfunctional pathways of PD. The corresponding biochemical metabolic reactions in human beings of the unmatched metabolites, especially non-lipid replicated metabolites, were manually searched in literature and public databases to identify metabolic pathways associated with PD.

## Generating a PD model

Aglobal genome-scale metabolic model, Recon3D (Recon3D\_3.01, https:// www.vmh.life/#downloadview) 18 , was used to generate the PD model. Recon3D is a genome-scale model of human metabolism, it contains 4,140 uniquemetabolites and 13,543 metabolic reactions, representing the activity of 3,697 metabolic genes, and provides information about gene-proteinreaction associations that connected metabolic genes with enzymes and metabolic reactions 18 . To better describe the metabolic perturbations of PD, additional metabolic reactions of human beings were added to re fi ne the global model, including new human metabolic reactions from the human metabolic model, Human1 129 , and new neuronal reactions from a dopaminergic neuronal metabolic model (iDopaNeuroCT model) 16 . Besides, new reactions of fatty acid oxidation metabolism were added to extend lipidomic of the global model, and new reactions associated with PD pathways missing from Recon3D that were added before PD model generation.

An established context-speci fi c metabolic model extraction pipeline ' XomicsToModel ' was used to generate a thermodynamically fl uxconsistent model 130 . This pipeline has been used to generate the dopaminergic neuronal models 16 ; it enables the integration of omics data, including genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, and bibliomic data, and the extraction of a physicochemically consistent mechanistic model from a global metabolic network 130 . In the ' XomicsToModel ' pipeline, the ' thermoKernel ' algorithm was used to extract the thermodynamically fl uxconsistent model, with the Gurobi v9.1.2 (Gurobi Optimization, LLC) as the linear optimization solver and with the ' fastcc ' algorithm 149 to check the fl ux consistency. The smallest non-zero fl ux was set to 1e-5 (parameter epsilon of

XomicsToModel), and other parameters were set as default as described in the paper of German et al. 130 .

All the compartments were removed from the re fi ned global model to explore the connection of metabolites better, and the reactions of ' Arti fi cial reactions ' , ' R group synthesis ' and ' Pool reactions ' subsystems were removed from the global model due to these reactions cannot re fl ect the connection of speci fi c metabolites. Then, a thermodynamically fl uxconsistent global subset of the extended Recon3D model, was extracted to shorten the running time before the PD model generation, and the default weight of all the metabolites and reactions in the subset was set to 0.01 at the beginning.

To get a compact model containing most of the pathways related to diagnosis-related metabolites of PD, the replicated metabolites were used as core metabolites. The weight of each core metabolite was calculated using the corresponding study number divided by 74 (total number of diagnosisrelated studies), where the maximum study number was used if the metabolite changed in different changes. Then, the weight of core metaboliteswas converted to a negative value. The negative weight value promotes a metabolite or reaction to be present in the model, the positive value promotes a metabolite or reaction to be absent, and zero means ambivalence with respect to presence or absence 130 .

Since the PD model was only generated based on a limited input set of core metabolites, alternate optimal models resulted in the variability of replicate-generated models given the same input data. Therefore, we used a semi-steady state approach to identify relatively stable dysfunctional pathways of PD. A weight of zero was set for highly connected metabolites, except for the core metabolites, where the highly connected metabolites were de fi ned as the metabolite connected with more than 9 reactions. Exchange reactions of these highly connected metabolites were added to relax them in the model if there were no corresponding exchange, demand or sink reactions in the global model. Then, the reaction weights were heuristically set through iterations: Ten models were generated without specifying reaction weights in the fi rst iteration. Then, we identi fi ed overlapping reactions for these ten models and set their weight to -1.1, where newly added exchange reactions of which were excluded to avoid the model becoming too large. Next, the updated reaction weights were added to the next iteration to explore more overlapped reactions until the reaction weight was stable and all overlapped reactions were more than 85% of reactions from any randomly generated model.

The fi nal relatively stable reactions with the weight were used to extract the core PD model, and the most signi fi cant pathways of replicated metabolites were visualized in the Escher map (https:// escher.github.io/#/) 150 to re fl ect the connectivity of the dysfunctional metabolites and further explore the possible PD metabolic markers. In the map, the metabolites were highlighted with their corresponding changes. To validate that the PD model was highly connected with core metabolites, we randomly generated extra 100 models with the same reaction size as the PD model from the global subset to identify the random distribution of reactions on each subsystem. One sample T-test was used to explore if there is any difference between the reaction proportion of random distribution and the reaction proportion of the PD model on each subsystem.

Constraint-based modeling process was implemented using the latest COBRA Toolbox 12 . The solver and algorithms were compatible with the COBRA Toolbox, and all of these calculations were conducted using MATLAB 2021a (MathWorks Inc.). The fi gures involved in this study were generated using OriginLab software (OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, MA, USA), MATLAB and R programming language.

## Data availability

All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article and its supplementary information fi les. The analysis codes used in this study is available in COBRA repository and can be accessed via this link: https://github.com/opencobra/COBRA.papers/2023\_metaPD.

Received: 27 July 2023; Accepted: 30 May 2024;

## Table 1

| Metabolites             | VMH ID   |   Increased_Frequency |   Decreased_Frequency | Replicated or Non-replicated    |
|:------------------------|:---------|----------------------:|----------------------:|:--------------------------------|
| Tyramine                | tym      |                     2 |                     0 | Replicated (consistently)       |
| Glycerophosphocholine   | g3pc     |                     0 |                     2 | Replicated (consistently)       |
| Uridine                 | uri      |                     1 |                     3 | Replicated (inconsistently)     |
| Ubiquinone-1            | q10      |                     0 |                     1 | Non-replicated (consistently)   |
| cholate                 | cholate  |                     1 |                     0 | Non-replicated (consistently)   |
| Sphinganine 1-phosphate | sph1p    |                     1 |                     1 | Non-replicated (inconsistently) |