## RESEARCH

## Open Access

## Artemisinin alleviates Parkinson's disease by targeting Adcy5-Gch1 axis to trigger a cascade generation of BH4 and dopamine in rats

Xin-xing Yang 1† , Guo-qing Wang 1† , Qian Wen 1 , Yu-jia Zhao 1 , Dai-di Li 1 and Feng Zhang 1*

† Xin-xing Yang and Guo-qing Wang contributed equally to this work.

*Correspondence: zhangfengzmc@163.com

1 Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education and Joint International Research Laboratory of Ethnomedicine of Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Basic Pharmacology of Guizhou Province and Laboratory Animal Center, Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, Guizhou, China

## Abstract

Background: Parkinson's disease is a highly prevalent neurodegenerative disorder. Hyposecretion of dopamine (DA) is the end result in the pathology of Parkinson's disease. Unfortunately, safe and efficient therapeutic drugs are deficient. Tyrosine hydroxylase is the rate-limiting enzyme for DA synthesis, could hydroxylate tyrosine and generate levodopa with tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) as an indispensable coenzyme. Furthermore, BH4 was confirmed to confer neuroprotection against Parkinson's disease. Thus, regulation of BH4 synthesis was verified to become a promising therapeutic strategy for Parkinson's disease.

Results: We demonstrate that artemisinin effectively produced neuroprotection against Parkinson's disease in rats. Integrated analysis of midbrain proteomics and nontargeted metabolomics suggests that artemisinin might target adenylate cyclase 5 (Adcy5) to increase GTP cyclohydrolase 1 (Gch1, BH4 synthetase) expression to further boost BH4 synthesis. To verify this hypothesis, molecular docking experiments demonstrate that ART could directly bind to Adcy5. Artemisinin increases Adcy5 and Gch1 expressions and BH4 production both in vivo and in vitro. Further rescue experiments demonstrate that artemisinin-generated DA neuroprotection and hypersecretion of DA and BH4 disappears after inhibition of Adcy5 or Gch1 in vitro. Additionally, suppression of Adcy5 aggravates Parkinson's disease manifestation, decreases midbrain DA and BH4 production and down-regulated Gch1 expression in vivo.

Conclusions: Artemisinin mediates neuroprotection against Parkinson's disease via regulation of Adcy5-Gch1-BH4 axis in rats. These findings present a beneficial potential for future application of artemisinin on Parkinson's disease treatment.

Keywords: Parkinson's disease, Artemisinin, Adcy5, Gch1, Tetrahydrobiopterin

© The Author(s) 2025. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.

Rat

MN9D cells

6-OHDA

ART

14 days

Midbrain tissue

S587

T591

F473 V590

V585

W586

N568 C

Y1085

S1082

AS1098 /

F1081

T1129

Adcy5

P=3.626x104

| log2 fold change | =1.644

BH4

P=3.41x10-2

| log2 fold change =1.488

## Background

Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative disorders. The pathology is characterized by gradual degeneration of dopamine (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) of midbrain and a decrease of DA neurotransmission in striatum [1]. The reduction degree in DA levels is positively correlated with the severity of clinical manifestations in PD patients [2]. Therefore, it's critical to explore safe and efficient alternative drugs via increasing DA neurotransmission.

DA is  mainly  synthesized  and  secreted  by  DA  neurons  in  midbrain.  Tyrosine  (Tyr) enters  brain  through  the  blood-brain  barrier  (BBB)  and  generates  Levodopa  (L-dopa) under the action of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH, DA synthesis rate-limiting enzyme) with tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) as a key cofactor. L-dopa is subsequently converted into DA catalyzed  by  dopa  decarboxylase  (DDC)  [2-4].  Under  physiological  conditions,  GTP cyclohydrolase 1 (Gch1, the rate-limiting enzyme of BH4 synthesis) catalyzed the conversion of GTP into 7,8-dihydroneopterin triphosphate and subsequently GTP is converted by 6-pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthase (Ptps) and finally reduced to BH4 by sepiapterin reductase (Spr). Notably, Gch1 is also an essential cofactor for DA synthesis in DA neurons. In summary, regulation of BH4 synthesis is indispensable for DA synthesis [5].

Adenylate  cyclase  5  (Adcy5)  is  a  major  member  of  adenylate  cyclase  family  and highly  expressed  in  the  brain  and  myocardium  [6,  7].  Brain-specific  expression  of Adcy5 is particularly selective with high expression in the striatum, nucleus accumbens  and  olfactory  nodes.  This  anatomical  specificity  might  underlie  amounts  of movement disorders (e.g., dystonia, chorea and PD) [8]. Further studies revealed that Adcy5 was primarily located in multi-spiny neurons expressing dopamine D1 receptors,  which  integrated  and  controlled  dopaminergic  signaling  [9].  Adcy5  knockout

MS

Proteomics

Non-target metabolomics

mice  exhibited  repetitive  behaviors  and  sociability  deficits,  which  was  applied  to investigate motor dysfunction in PD [10]. Above mentioned evidence suggested that Adcy5 played an important role in the pathogenesis of PD.

Artemisinin  (ART)  is  a  first-line  anti-malarial  drug  extracted  from  the  leaves  of artemisia annua. ART has broad-spectrum pharmacological activities, such as antiinflammation,  anti-oxidant,  anti-infection  and  neuroprotective  effects  [11,  12]. Recently, ART is confirmed as a therapeutic agent to treat central nervous system (CNS)-like diseases by acting on inflammatory processes [13]. Moreover, ART was found  to  inhibit  α-synuclein  aggregation  and  reduce  neurotoxicity,  apoptosis  and reactive oxygen species production, making it become a potential promising candidate for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases [14-16]. However, ART-mediated neuroprotection against PD is still unknown.

In this study, ART effectively protected DA neurons and increased DA production and thus generated neuroprotection against PD. Then, we comprehensively explored the molecular mechanism underlying the effects of ART in 'protein-metabolite' level via  combined  analysis  of  proteomics  with  non-targeted  metabolomics.  This  work revealed that ART targeted Adcy5 to increase BH4 synthesis to further enhance TH activity and DA production. Taken together, this study provided evidence that ART might act as a potential therapeutic alternative drug for PD treatment.

## Results

## ART attenuated 6-OHDA-induced DA neurotoxicity in vivo and in vitro

To determine the protective effects of ART on 6-OHDA-induced DA neuronal loss, rats received a single intranigral injection of 6-OHDA into SN on one side of brain followed by intragastric treatment with ART (15 and 30 mg/kg/d) for 14 consecutive days (Fig. 1A). As shown in Fig. 1B, C, D, E, rats injected with 6-OHDA showed an obvious motor incoordination and 6-OHDA + ART (30 mg/kg) group exhibited the improved behavior dysfunction with increased exploration distance and rotarod time, decreased time climbed the pole and time crossed the beam.

We  further  used  DA  neuronal  cell  MN9D  to  evaluate  the  effects  of  ART  on 6-OHDA-induced DA neurons damage in vitro (Fig. 1H). CCK-8 results showed that ART at the concentration of 40 μM could increase cell viability (Fig. 1I and Fig. S1). Furtherly, we measured TH-positive cells immunoreactivity in the SN and TH protein  expression  in  vivo  and  in  vitro,  we  found  that  the  survival  of  DA  neurons  in 6-OHDA group was lower than that in control group, which showed a significant increase after ART (30 mg/kg)/ART (40 μM) administration (Fig. 1F, J). In addition, the  enzymatic activity  of  TH  was  evaluated  in  vivo  and  in  vitro.  Results  indicated that ART increased the enzymatic activity of TH (Fig. 1G, K). Moreover, the proteins quantification  of  TH  was  consistent  with  the  TH-positive  cells  immunoreactivity analysis (Fig. 1L, M). Next, we also detected the DA, homovanillic acid (HVA) and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic  acid  (DOPAC)  level  in  midbrain  and  MN9D  cells,  data indicated that ART increased DA, HAV and DOPAC contents (Fig. 1N, O, P, Q, R, S). Taken together, ART conferred neuroprotection against 6-OHDA-induced DA neurons damage both in vitro and in vivo .

pole (sec

The pole (ind)

ART (mgkg) : 30 : is jó

Col cures

ART (mg/kg)

TH

GAPDH

58 kDa

36 kDa

bona dema enman

ART(mg/kg)

ART (mg/kg) - is 30

s*onınto L\_AHDA induico DA nournta

Control

ART (30 mg/kg)

6-OHDA+ART

(15 mg/kg)

6-OHDA +ART

(30 mg/kg)

Fig. 1 ART attenuated 6-OHDA-induced DA neurotoxicity in vivo and in vitro . A Schematic of experimental design in vivo. Rats received a single intranigral injection of 6-OHDA into substantia nigra (SN) on one side of brain. Then, rats were given intragastric treatment of ART (15 and 30 mg/kg/d) for 14 consecutive days. B , C , D , E After the last treatment of ART, rat behavioral changes were assessed by open field, rotarod test, pole test and beam balance test, respectively. F Rat midbrain DA neurons were labeled with anti-TH antibody. Black 'ellipse' presented the area of SN. DA neuronal loss in SN was detected by TH-positive cells immunoreactivity. Scale bar = 100 μm. G TH enzyme activity was measured by TH activity assay kit in vivo. H Schematic of in vitro experimental design. MN9D cell cultures were treated with ART (10 and 40 μM) for 30 min before 6-OHDA (100 μM) application. I The protective concentration of ART on MN9D cells damaged by 6-OHDA was determined via CCK-8 assay. J MN9D cells were immunostained with anti-TH antibody. MN9D cells damage were evaluated by calculating the average immunofluorescence intensity of TH-positive cells. Scale bars = 200 μm or 50 μm. K TH enzyme activity was measured by TH activity assay kit in vitro. L , M The protein levels of TH in midbrain and MN9D cells were determined by western blot. N , O , P , Q , R , S DA, HVA and DOPAC contents in vivo and in vitro were measured by ELISA. Data were presented as mean ± SEM from five-ten rats and the three groups of cells. * P &lt;  0.05 compared with control group; # P &lt;  0.05 compared with 6-OHDA group

## Quantitative proteomics indicated ART increased Adcy5 protein expression in midbrain

We  next  performed  midbrain  tissue  samples  from  6-OHDA  and  6-OHDA + ART (30 mg/kg) groups for TMT quantitative proteomic analysis. The database was searched to analyze the results and the data were further filtered to understand the overall situation of peptide segments and protein numbers (Fig. S2A). As shown in Fig. S2B, the majority  of  peptide  segments  were  distributed  between  7-20  amino  acids,  following the general pattern based on enzymatic hydrolysis and mass spectrometry fragmentation  methods.  Comprehensive  functional  annotation  on  the  identified  proteins  was conducted (Fig. S2C, D). The results of principal component analysis (PCA), Pearson's correlation  coefficient  and  relative  standard  deviation  of  all  samples  showed  that  the intra-group differences between the two sample groups were small and the inter-group differences  were  obvious,  which  was  feasible  for  differential  analysis  (Fig.  2A  and  Fig. S2E, F). Furtherly, a total of 296 significantly different proteins (SDP) was identified. Figure 2B indicated that ART up-regulated 183 proteins and down-regulated 113 proteins in midbrain. In three biological replicates, the volcano map, heat map and violin diagram of 296 SDP presented elevated Adcy5 levels with the treatment of ART ( P = 3.626 × 10 -4 ;

injection

Pole test

ARTL S

N dansl

Beam balance test cross

20- to

cam(sec)

A·mM

G-ONDA

ART (morg) : 30 : is sö

(% of control)

Cell survival rate cit in m

ART(»M)

Distance

ART (mg/kg)|

SN (% of control)

Open field

is 30

Midbrain

Mitil

Tir mod (aeo)

on

O-OHUA

TH activity

Rotarod test #

Go terms name

PC (16.2%)

1 VH0 -9

2050- cellular process

biological regulation multicellular organismal process

response to stimulus developmental process

signaling localization

metabolic process immune system process

behavior other

multi-organism process cell

intracellular protein-containing complex

binding catalytic activity

transporter activity molecular function regulator

other structural molecule activity

molecular transducer activity

PC (47.5%)

Group

Dguok

Nos1

Adcy1

Qdpr

Coro1a

Sic12a5 |

Aldh1|1

Glul

Adcy9

Coro2a

Ptpn5

Bologica

I6-OHDA

6-OHDA,ART

Number of proteins

Duantitative nrotenmics indicated ART increaced Ad

Fig. 2 Quantitative proteomics indicated ART increased Adcy5 protein expression in midbrain. A PCA of quantitative proteomics in 6-OHDA and 6-OHDA + ART groups. B Overall profile of all SDP . C Volcano plots of all SDP . D Heatmaps of all SDP . Red box represented Adcy5. E The relative content of Adcy5 from quantitative proteomics in 6-OHDA and 6-OHDA + ART groups. F Subcellular structural annotation classification of all SDP . Red box represented 21% SDP located on cell membrane. G GO enrichment analysis of all SDP . Red boxes represented metabolic process and behavior. H KEGG enrichment analysis of all SDP . Red boxes showed dopaminergic synapse pathway. Data were presented as mean ± SEM from three rats. SDP were identified based on P val &lt;  0.05 (compared with 6-OHDA group) and |log2 fold change|&gt; 1 (compared with 6-OHDA group)

|log2  fold  change| = 1.644)  relative  to  the  6-OHDA  group  (Fig.  2C-E).  With  regard  to suborganellar localization, a total of 21% SDP located on cell membrane and Adcy5 was well represented in the set (Fig. 2F). Gene ontology (GO) biological process revealed that these SDP mainly participated in metabolic process and behavior biological processes (Fig. 2G). Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) analysis showed these SDP mainly participated in dopaminergic synapse pathways (Fig. 2H). Based on the results of midbrain proteomics, ART could increase Adcy5 expression.

## Non-targeted metabolomics revealed ART elevated BH4 level in midbrain

We also utilized midbrain tissue from 6-OHDA and 6-OHDA + ART (30 mg/kg) groups for non-targeted metabolomics. Firstly, quality control validation was conducted on the samples (Fig. S3A, B). Through negative mode of PCA analysis, there were no significant differences between 6-OHDA and 6-OHDA + ART groups within almost complete

up

· down

-log 10 P value

Regulated Type

· Up

· Down 113

Nome

* Adcy5

PC2(17.81%)

Variable Importance in Projection (VIP)

Positive

C-OHDA·ART-S

сOHDA-2

C-OHDA+ART-1 ·

· COHDA·ART-6

OHDATAXIN

PC1(25.05%)

6-OHDA+ART vs 6-OHDA

(Log2 fold change)

| Amino acid and Its metabolites(17.88%)

W90314047

Heterocyclic compounds(12.61%)

roanic acid and its 0uzl

· Others (6.49%)

| GP(4.81%)|

· PA(4.69%)

1 Alcohol and amines(4,55%) |

· Hormones and hormone related compounds(2.61%)

· Terpenolds (1.61%)

· Carbohydrates and Its metabolites (1.32%)

· CoEnzyme and vitamins (0.86%)

· 2L V.017

· Steroids (0.54%)

· Bile acids (0.44%)

· Lig-s and Coumarins (0.33%)

· Tryptamines, Cholines, Pigments(0.32%)

· Phenolic acids(0.07%)|

· Carboxylic acids and derivatives (0.01%)

Non-taraeted metaholomics revealed ART elevated RHA level in midhrain A PCA diaaram of nocitive

Negative

COHDA-ART-20 GONDAS" CONDA

CONDA-S

CONDAY COMDAS

Fig. 3 Non-targeted metabolomics revealed ART elevated BH4 level in midbrain. A PCA diagram of positive and negative modes in 6-OHDA and 6-OHDA + ART groups. B Overall profile of SDM. C Volcano plots of all SDM. Black arrow represented BH4. D Heatmaps of all SDM. Red box represented BH4. E The relative content of BH4 from non-targeted metabolomics in 6-OHDA and 6-OHDA + ART groups. F Subcellular structural annotation classification of all SDM. Red box represented 12.61% SDM located on heterocyclic compound. G Z-score diagram and inter-group differences of BH4. Red box represented BH4. H KEGG enrichment analysis of the all SDM. Red box represented biosynthesis of cofactors pathways. Data were presented as mean ± SEM from six rats. SDM were identified based on P val &lt;  0.05 (compared with 6-OHDA group) and |log2 fold change|&gt; 1(compared with 6-OHDA group)

overlap of the centroids, whereas there were significant differences between groups from positive mode (Fig. 3A and Fig. S3C, D). In general, there were 544 up-regulated significantly different metabolites (SDM) and 341 down-regulated SDM with ART administration in positive mode. Meanwhile, only 145 down-regulated SDM in negative mode were detected after ART application (Fig. 3B). Overall, the volcano map, heat map and violin diagram of 893 SDM showed that ART increased BH4 level ( P = 3.41 × 10 -2 ; |log2 fold change| = 1.488) relative to the 6-OHDA group (Fig. 3C-E). The subcellular structure of SDM indicated that 12.61% SDM located on heterocyclic compound and BH4 was well represented in the set (Fig. 3F). In six biological replicates, Z-score map further indicated that ART could increase BH4 level, in which the inter-group differences were  obvious  (Fig.  3G).  KEGG  pathway  found  that  all  SDM  mainly  were  enriched  in the biosynthesis of cofactors pathways (Fig. 3H). However, lower SDM abundance were detected in non-targeted metabolomics, resulting in lower correlation between SDP and

Statistics

· Up: 893

· Down: 486

· Insignificant: 2826

PC(14:0/20:1(112))

PA(20;0ia-21:0)

PA 20:02-17:0

Nicotinate mononuclectide

Indole-3-acetamide

Imipenem

Hydrocinnamic acid ethyl ester

Glafenin

DL o-Lipoic acid

D-Glucoronic Acid

Cinromide retrahydroblopterin

Asp-Pro-Gly.

Ala-Pro-Ala

·6-OHDA

· 6-OHDA ·ART

PC1(20.21%)

· 6-OHDA +ART

Number of metabolites

coo

6-OHDA+ART/6-OHDA

Biosynthesis

GTP

Remedial synthesis

H,N-

KEGG pathway: Metabolie pathway

Input

IB:Adcy5

IB:Gch1

IB:GAPDH

DHPR

BHAT

139 kDa

28 kDa

Cia A Camhinod anodie of aratonmice with non toraotod matohnamice chamiod ADT miaht romuloto RHA

Sirpa

Gch1

Adey9

Fig. 4 Combined analysis of proteomics with non-targeted metabolomics showed ART might regulate BH4 level via Adcy5-Gch1 axis. A Schematic diagram of BH4 biosynthesis. B PPI diagram of SDP and BH4 synthase. Blue circle represented BH4 synthase and red circle represented SDP-associated with BH4 synthase. C KEGG metabolic pathway of BH4 biosynthesis. Green line represented Adcy5, black line represented Gch1, blue line represented Ptps, purple line represented Spr and red dot represented BH4. D ART promoted stability of Adcy5 to different temperature gradients in MN9D cells by CETSA. E MN9D cells were administrated with ART and cells were collected to detect the combination of Adcy5 and Gch1. F Co-localization of Adcy5 (green) and Gch1 (red) by immunofluorescence analysis (Scale bars = 50 μm or 25 μm). Data were expressed as mean ± SEM from three groups of cells. * P &lt;  0.05 compared with control group

SDM, implying that ART-elicited high protein abundance (296 SDP) might be not necessary to modulate metabolites.

## Combined analysis of proteomics with non-targeted metabolomics showed ART might regulate BH4 level via Adcy5-Gch1 axis

Figure 4A illustrated the biosynthesis and remedial synthesis pathways of BH4 (Fig. 4A). Proteomics and non-targeted metabolomics indicated that ART increased Adcy5 and BH4 levels, respectively. Based on the results of proteomic analysis, ART had no directly regulatory  effects  on  BH4  synthase,  including  Gch1,  Ptps,  Spr  and  Dhfr.  Was  there  a crosstalk between Adcy5 and BH4? To this end, the protein-protein interactions (PPI) with  SDP  (red)  and  BH4  synthase  (blue)  were  predicted  in  Fig.  4B.  According  to  the value of |log2 fold change|, the first ranking was Ptpn5, contrary to the theoretical trend. The second ranking was Adcy5, consistent with the theoretical trend. Noteworthy, the regulation  of  BH4  synthesis  mainly  depended  on  Gch1.  Meanwhile,  it  is  well  known that Gch1 is also an essential cofactor for DA synthesis in nigrostriatal neurons. Moreover, the KEGG pathways between Adcy5 and BH4 were indicated in Fig. 4C. Generally speaking, small molecule compounds might augment the protein fixity via forming small molecule-protein complexes. To clarify the effect of ART on the stability of Adcy5, we

Spr

IgG

Pips

IP: Gch1

Pipns)

Cat

Pts

Dhír

Odpr

performed cellular thermal shift assays (CETSA) and found that ART increased Adcy5 thermotolerance in a temperature gradient (35-71 °C) on MN9D cells (Fig. 4D). Further Co-IP assay indicated that 6-OHDA reduced the combination of Gch1 and Adcy5, ART administration increased the combination of Gch1 and Adcy5 (Fig. 4E). Notably, immunofluorescence staining showed apparent overlap (yellow) between the Gch1 (red) and Adcy5 (green) signals, indicating a direct interaction of Adcy5-Gch1 on MN9D cells (Fig. 4F).

## Validation of the effects of ART on Adcy5 and BH4 in vivo and in vitro

Next, to verify  the  results  of  the  proteomics  and  metabolomics,  the  selected  proteins and metabolites were analyzed in vivo and in vitro. We sought to determine the effects of ART on Adcy5 and BH4. It was found that ART intervention resulted in an apparent increase of Adcy5 and BH4 in midbrain and MN9D cells, consistent with the sequencing results (Fig. 5A-D). Furthermore, we also detected the expressions of BH4 synthase (Gch1, Spr and Ptps) in midbrain and MN9D cells. Results indicated that ART could promote Gch1, Spr and Ptps protein expressions (Fig. 5E, F). However, Fig. 5 was only a parallel validation of high-throughput sequencing results, the regulatory relationship between Adcy5 and BH4 still needed to be further investigated.

## ART targeted Adcy5 to increase BH4 and DA synthesis to attenuate DA neuron damage in vitro

It  was  confirmed  that  the  regulation  of  BH4  synthesis  mainly  depended  on  Gch1 [4].  Considering  the  notable  increase  of  Adcy5  by  ART,  MN9D  cells  deficient  in Adcy5  and  Gch1  were  used  to  determine  whether  ART-generated  neuroprotection  was  related  to  Adcy5-Gch1  axis  activation.  Therefore,  we  selected  SQ  (an inhibitor  of  Adcy5)  and  DAHP  (an  inhibitor  of  Gch1).  It  was  clear  that  SQ  and DAHP inhibited  Adcy5/Gch1  mRNA  expressions  without  cytotoxicity,  respectively (Fig. 6A, B and Fig. S4A, B). At the same time, data indicated that Adcy5 and Gch1 enzyme activities were decreased after SQ (200 μM) and DAHP (20 mM) addition, respectively  (Fig.  6C,  D).  Then,  cells  were  randomly  divided  into  6-OHDA + ART, 6-OHDA + ART + SQ  and  6-OHDA + ART + DAHP  groups.  Results  showed  that compared  with  6-OHDA + ART  group,  the  activity  of  Adcy5  and  Gch1  decreased after SQ administration. Interestingly, compared with 6-OHDA + ART group, Gch1 activity  decreased  and  Adcy5  activity  remained  unchanged  after  DAHP  administration (Fig. 6E, F). As shown in Fig. 6G, both SQ and DAHP could reduce the protein  expressions  of  BH4  synthases  (Gch1,  Ptps  and  Spr).  In  addition,  SQ  markedly decreased Gch1 protein expression and DAHP could not reduce Adcy5 protein level, suggesting  that  Adcy5  could  be  an  upstream  signal  protein  of  Gch1,  affecting  BH4 biosynthesis  in  a  Gch1-dependent  manner  (Fig.  6G).  Furthermore,  the  protective effects of ART on DA neurons were absent upon cells treated with SQ and DAHP for 24 h prior to 6-OHDA + ART addition (Fig. 6H, I). Moreover, cells were treated with SQ or DAHP to evaluate the enzymatic activity of TH. Results indicated that SQ or DAHP decreased the enzymatic activity of TH compared with 6-OHDA + ART group (Fig. 6J). Likewise, the ART-afforded hypersecretion of DA, BH4, HVA and DOPAC were much less prominent with SQ and DAHP treatment 24 h before 6-OHDA + ART

ART (uM)

Ptps

fing Validation ofthe offerto nf ART an Adry5 and RHA in win and in vitro A C Wastern blat analycic of

BH4 content

0.3- g0.2-

/mL)

Fig. 5 Validation of the effects of ART on Adcy5 and BH4 in vivo and in vitro. A , C Western blot analysis of Adcy5 protein expression in midbrain and MN9D cells, respectively. B , D ELISA detected BH4 content in midbrain and MN9D cells, respectively. E , F Western blot analysis detected the protein expressions of Gch1, Spr and Ptps in midbrain and MN9D cells. Data were expressed as mean ± SEM from five rats and three groups of cells. * P &lt;  0.05 compared with control group. # P &lt;  0.05 compared with 6-OHDA group

exposure (Fig. 6K-N). These results implied that ART targeted Adcy5 to increase BH4 and DA synthesis to attenuate DA neuronal damage in vitro .

We further  used  Schrödinger  2021  software  and  MOE2021  software  to  predict  the binding modes of ART and Adcy5. The molecular docking of Adcy5 and ART suggested that ART might bind to 14 amino acid residues on the surface of the Adcy5, indicating that ART could directly act on Adcy5 (Fig. 6O). According to the protein ligand interaction fingerprint and standard precision (Fig. 6P), Ser 1128, Gly 1127 and Thr 591 are the top3 sites in the docking of Adcy5 and ART. In order to identify the key functional binding sites of ART to Adcy5, we mutated Adcy5 Ser 1128 to Ala, Gly 1127 to Ala, Thr 591 to Ala. Further establishing   Adcy5 S1128A ,   Adcy5 G1127A ,   Adcy5 T591A MN9D cells. The proteins expression of TH revealed that only   Adcy5 S1128A could reverse the protective effect of ART on DA neuronal damage, indicating that Ser 1128 might the key functional binding site of ART to Adcy5 (Fig. 6Q). In addition,   Adcy5 S1128A could reduce the enzymatic activity of TH (Fig. 6R) and content of DA, BH4, HVA and DOPAC (Fig. 6S-V), as well as

Adcy5 mRNA

6-OHDA+ART 6-OHDA+ART 6-OHDA·ART

+SQ

·DAHP

6-OHDA+ART 6-OHDA·ART 6-OHDA+ ART

ART -

6-OHDA -

Adcy5wT -

Adcystara

Adcy581128A

26 kDa

tornoton Arrufta incrosco RHana l

6-OHDA+ART (40 pM)

6-OHDA+ART (40 pM)+SQ (200 pM)

6-OHDA+ART (40 uM)+DAHP(20 mM)

6-OHDA+ART+DAHP

Fig. 6 ART targeted Adcy5 to increase BH4 and DA synthesis to attenuate DA neuron damage in vitro . Cells were pretreated with SQ (200 μM, Adcy5 inhibitor) and DAHP (20 mM, Gch1 inhibitor) for 24 h and then received ART and 6-OHDA administration. A , B qRT-PCR examined the inhibition rate of Adcy5 and Gch1, respectively. C , D , E , F Enzyme activity assay kit detected Adcy5 and Gch1 activity in vitro. G Western blot analysis measured the Adcy5, Gch1, Spr and Ptps protein expressions. H MN9D cells were immunostained with anti-TH antibody. MN9D cell loss was analyzed by calculating the average immunofluorescence intensity of TH-positive cells. Scale bars = 200 μm or 50 μm. I Western blot analysis detected TH protein expression. J TH enzyme activity was measured by TH activity assay kit in vitro. K , L , M , N ELISA detected DA, BH4, HVA and DOPAC contents. O Molecular docking simulation of ART and Adcy5. P Fingerprint of the docking interaction between Adcy5 protein and ART. Q Western blot analysis measured the TH protein expression in   Adcy5 S1128A , Adcy5 G1127A ,   Adcy5 T591A MN9D stable strain. R TH enzyme activity was measured by TH activity assay kit in vitro. S , T , U , V ELISA detected DA, BH4, HVA and DOPAC contents. W MN9D cells infected with   Adcy5 S1128A virus were immunostained with anti-TH antibody. MN9D cell loss was analyzed by calculating the average immunofluorescence intensity of TH-positive cells. Scale bars = 200 μm or 50 μm. X Western blot analysis measured the Adcy5, Gch1, Spr and Ptps protein expressions. Data were expressed as mean ± SEM from three groups of cells. * P &lt;  0.05 compared with control group. # P &lt;  0.05 compared with 6-OHDA group. &amp; P &lt;  0.05 compared with 6-OHDA + ART group. $ P &lt;  0.05 compared with 6-OHDA + ART + Adcy5 WT  group

decrease the fluorescence intensity of TH and the protein expressions of Adcy5 and BH4 synthases (Gch1, Ptps and Spr) (Fig. 6W, X). Therefore, these observations supported the regulation of Adcy5-Gch1 axis by ART, particularly through the Adcy5-Ser 1128 site.

(% of 6-OHDA+ART)

Protein expression level

ARTI

SQ (200 um)

DAHP (20 ml)

TH/GAPDH

Adcys™t

Adyt

Adcy501127A

Adcy5511224

(U/L)

3ch1 activity of 6-OHDA+ART)

tin

SQ

6-OHDA+ART+SQ

(pg/mL)

DA content

ART incroscod RHA and DA cunthocic to amaliorato DO via ronillation of AdryE in viun Aftor DO rat

Adcys

on rod (sec)

Time stayed

Control SQ

6-OHDA (

Rotarod Test

Fig. 7 ART increased BH4 and DA synthesis to ameliorate PD via regulation of Adcy5 in vivo . After PD rat model preparation, SQ (40 ng) was continuously injected into midbrain via cannula and ART (30 mg/kg) was treated by continuous intragastric administration for 14 days. A Western blot analysis detected the inhibition rate of Adcy5 in rat midbrain. B Enzyme activity assay kit detected Adcy5 activity in rat midbrain. C , D , E , F Rat behavioral changes were assessed by rotarod test, beam balance test, pole test and open field test. G Western blotting detected the protein expressions of Adcy5, Gch1, Spr and Ptps in rat midbrain. H DA neurons in SN were labeled with anti-TH antibody. Black 'ellipse' presented the area of SN. TH-positive neurons immunoreactivity was performed to assess the loss of DA neurons. Scale bar = 100 μm. I Western blot analysis measured the protein expression of TH in rat midbrain. J TH enzyme activity was measured by TH activity assay kit in rat midbrain. K , L , M , N ELISA detected DA, BH4, HVA and DOPAC contents in rat midbrain. Data were expressed as mean ± SEM from five-ten rats. * P &lt;  0.05 compared with control group, &amp; P &lt;  0.05 compared with 6-OHDA + ART group

## ART increased BH4 and DA synthesis to ameliorate PD via regulation of Adcy5 in vivo

Our in vitro studies confirmed that Adcy5 was critical for ART-mediated neuroprotection.  Furtherly,  midbrain  Adcy5-deficient  rats  were  conducted  to  evaluate  this  effect in vivo. SQ was continuously injected into midbrain via cannula for 14 days. The protein expression of Adcy5 was significantly decreased by SQ (Fig. 7A). SQ significantly inhibited the enzymatic activity of Adcy5 (Fig. 7B). Then, we randomly divided the PD rats into 6-OHDA + ART and 6-OHDA + ART + SQ groups. In rotarod test, beam balance test, pole test and open field, SQ reversed ART-attenuated motor dysfunction (Fig. 7CF). In addition, SQ reduced BH4 synthases (Gch1, Ptps and Spr) protein expressions and BH4 level, indicating that ART targeted Adcy5 to regulate Gch1 signaling pathways to affect  BH4  biosynthesis  (Fig.  7G).  Likewise,  after  inhibition  of  midbrain  Adcy5,  ART failed to present protection on DA neurons from detection of TH-positive cells immunoreactivity (Fig. 7H), the protein expression of TH (Fig. 7I), the enzymatic activity of TH (Fig. 7J) and secretory function of DA neurons (Fig. 7K-N). These results demonstrated that ART increased BH4 and DA synthesis to ameliorate PD via regulation of Adcy5 in vivo.

* istance (im)

TH-positive intensity in

SN (% of 6-OHDA+ART)

Beam balance test

Time to cross the beam (sec)

Time to climb the pole (sec)

## Discussion

In this work, ART effectively protected DA neurons and increased DA production and thus conferred neuroprotection against PD. However, prior to this study, a global analysis of the biological processes that were regulated by ART in PD animal midbrain had not  been  performed.  Using  an  integrated  non-targeted  metabolomics  and  proteomic approaches, we had demonstrated and validated that ART targeted Adcy5-Gch1 axis to further increase midbrain DA level to attenuate PD.

For  decades,  DA  neurotransmitter  deficiency  has  been  considered  to  be  a  critical feature to explain motor symptoms of PD and a final target for the pharmacological therapy of PD patients [17-20]. For example, as the gold-standard therapeutic drug for  PD,  L-dopa is  a  precursor  drug  for  DA  without  pharmacological activity,  entering CNS through BBB and converting to DA through the action of DDC. However, most PD  patients  develop  motor  complications  after  3-5  years  of  L-dopa  administration. Therefore, additional alternative drugs in terms of increasing DA neurotransmitter have become the key to treating all types of PD patients [21-23].

It was derived from proteomics that ART increased Adcy5 protein expression and this was confirmed in our validation. Adcy5 is a membrane-integrated protein. A majority of important biological processes take place at the cell membrane. The proportion of current proven drugs targeting membrane proteins is more than 50%. Adcy5 converts ATP to  the  second  messenger  cAMP.  In  cAMP  signaling,  Adcy5  is  a  key  regulatory  factor in cortical and thalamic signal transduction, which can control the initiation of autonomous movements and prevent involuntary movements [24]. The Adcy5/cAMP system in the striatum served as a therapeutic target for dyskinesia in PD patients and inhibition of Adcy5 could prevent L-dopa-induced dyskinesia in PD animal models [9]. Meanwhile, as the target metabolite, BH4 is an essential cofactor for enzymes that regulate neurotransmitter synthesis, such as serotonin, nor-epinephrine as well as DA [25-27]. The brain distribution of BH4 is heterogeneous with highly enriched in monoaminergic neurons expressing TH and thyrotropin-releasing hormone [4]. The imbalance of BH4 could affect neurotransmitter production, which finally led to the occurrence of neurological disorders. On the other hand, the persistently increased BH4 and DA levels and fully restored loss of TH protein ameliorated PD syndromes in BH4-deficient mice after subchronic BH4 administration [28].

This provoked our curiosity to explore the interaction between Adcy5 and BH4, as well as the molecular mechanism of ART that links Adcy5 with DA. Notably, related to  6-OHDA  addition,  ART  administration  increased  the  combination  of  Gch1  and Adcy5. Furthermore, consistent with these observations, we first presented that ART might bind to 14 amino acid residues on the surface of the Adcy5 via molecular docking  technology,  indicating  that  Adcy5  might  be  a  direct  target  of  ART.  In  addition, we identified Adcy5 S1128 was the key functional binding site. Then, the integrated non-targeted metabolomics and proteomic analysis indicated that ART might target Adcy5 to up-regulate Gch1 expression to further increase BH4 level. Thus, we determined the existence of Adcy5-Gch1 axis and assumed that ART targeted Adcy5 to mediate  Gch1  signaling  and  then  to  increase  BH4  content  and  TH  activity,  which accelerated  the  production  of  DA  by  DA  neurons.  Notably,  loss-of-function  mutations  in  Gch1  resulted  in  DA  depletion,  L-dopa-responsive  dystonia  as  well  as  loss

of  DA neurons [29]. Thus, Gch1 variants were closely associated with an increased risk for PD [30, 31]. From 'protein-metabolite' perspective, metabolites are the active substances that regulate organism function. Therefore, BH4 remains the key element to consider in PD treatment. Previous studies revealed a lower BH4 concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid of PD patients [4, 32, 33]. Recently, BH4 metabolism perturbation was confirmed to participate in DA depletion in the striatum of MPTP-treated PD mice, whereas administration of BH4 restored DA contents and TH activity [34]. Also, initial TH gene therapy experiments demonstrated that a parallel source of BH4 was essential to achieve sufficient L-dopa levels in the brain [35-37]. Finally, we verified  that  ART-protected  DA  neuronal  survival,  hypersecretion  of  DA  and  modulation of the Gch1 signaling and BH4 level disappeared after inhibition of Adcy5 both in vivo and in vitro.

Collectively,  this  study  illustrated  the  neuroprotective  effects  of  ART  on  PD  and further supported the notion that the effects of ART on neurotransmitter modulation were highly associated with regulation of Adcy5-Gch1 axis. These results highlighted ART might be as a novel therapeutic alternative drug for PD treatment.

## Conclusions

This  study  demonstrated  ART  mediated  neuroprotection  against  PD  by  targeting Adcy5-Gch1 axis.

## Methods

## Materials and reagents

ART (with a purity of 100%, T0392, CAS 63968-64-9) was purchased from TargetMol (USA). BH4 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit was bought from Beijing 4 A Biotech Co., Ltd (Beijing, China). ELISA kit for DA was bought from Elabscience Biotechnology Co., Ltd (Wuhan China). ELISA kit for Adcy5, Gch1, TH, HVA and DOPAC were bought from Jiangsu Enzyme Exemption Industry Co., Ltd (Jiangsu, China). 6-OHDA (Catalog No. H4381-100MG) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis,  Missouri,  USA).  Protein  A/G  beats  (Catalog  No.HY-K0202),  SQ22536  (SQ, Adcy5 inhibitor, Catalog No. HY-100396/CS-6136) and DAHP (Gch1 inhibitor, Catalog No. HY-100954/CS-0020633) were purchased from Med Chem Express (Shanghai, China).

## Animals and treatment

Male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (180-220 g, 7-8 weeks) were purchased from Hunan Slake  Jingda  Experimental  Animal  Co.,  Ltd  (SCXK  2019-0004).  All  of  the  animal studies  were  carried  out  after  approval  by  Laboratory  Animal  Centre,  Zunyi  Medical  University  use  committees  (Appl.  No.  ZMU21-2105-112)  and  that  all  procedures were ethical and humane. Rat PD model was obtained by unilateral injection of 6-OHDA (5 μg/μL) in SN. As described before [38], the coordinates of rats were 5.2 mm posterior to fontanelle, 1.8 mm lateral to the midline, and 8.2 mm ventral to the skull surface. ART (15 and 30 mg/kg/d, intragastric treatment) was administrated

for  14  consecutive  days  after  6-OHDA  injection.  For  the  knockdown  of  midbrain Adcy5, after PD model preparation, SQ (40 ng) was continuously injected into midbrain via cannula and ART was given by continuous intragastric administration for 14 consecutive days.

## Rotarod test

On the 14th day after 6-OHDA injection, rats were trained on the rotarod apparatus (Tameng; ENV-574R, China) at a fixed speed of 9 rpm for 60 s. After training triple, rats were tested at a rotation speed of acceleration parameters (0-40 rpm). The time each rat remained on the rotating bar before falling was recorded with 3 trials. Each rat was subjected to the next round of experiments at 30 min intervals. Data shown was the mean time spent on the rotarod over 3 test trials.

## Open field test

On the 14th day after 6-OHDA injection, in a quiet dark room, rats were placed through the  center  of  the  box  and  allowed  to  explore  the  environment  freely  for  10  min,  and the instrument automatically recorded the total distance moved by rats. At the end of the first group, alcohol was used to eliminate the odor in the open field box and the rat excrement was removed before the next group of experiments. Data presented the average of the total distance.

## Balance beam test

Rat was placed on a wooden stick (120 cm long and a diameter of 2 cm) one end and a safety box was placed on the other end. The crawling distance of rats was 120 cm, and the height between the balance beam and the experimental table was 20 cm. Rats were pre-trained to adapt to the environment before the experiment. The time reached the safety box was recorded, and the average of 3 tests for the data was taken.

## Pole test

The pole climbing experiment aims to test the coordination ability of rat limbs. Before the experiment, rats were placed on a 6 cm wooden ball and passed through a 100 cm long pole (connected to the ball) perpendicular to the ground. During the formal experiment, rats were placed on a sphere at the top of the pole climbing and the time was recorded when rats climbed from the top of the pole to the bottom (with both front paws on the ground). Data shown was the mean time over 3 test trials.

## Cell culture and treatment

DA  neuronal  cell  line  MN9D  (Sigma-Aldrich,  SCC281)  was  purchased  from  SigmaAldrich Ltd (Michigan, USA). MN9D cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM), supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin. ART were pretreated for 30 min, and then 6-OHDA (100 μM) was applied for 24 h. Finally, cells were collected

to evaluate the relevant indexes. For the knockdown of Adcy5 and Gch1, cells were pretreated with SQ (200 μM) and DAHP (20 mM) for 24 h, and then received ART and 6-OHDA administration.

## Western blot analysis

Extracted  protein  was  isolated  by  SDS-PAGE  and  transferred  to  PVDF  membranes. After blocking with 5% non-fat milk for 3 h, membranes were incubated with primary antibodies  overnight  (&gt; 16  h)  at  4  °C.  Anti-TH  (1:3000,  25,859-1-AP),  anti-GAPDH (1:5000, 10,494-1-AP) and anti-Ptps (1:1000, 12,150-1-AP) antibodies were purchased from  Proteintech.  Anti-Spr  (1:1000,  abs1213393)  antibody  was  obtained  from  Absin. Anti-Gch1 (1:1000, K007506P) antibody was purchased from Solarbio (Beijing, China). Anti-Adcy5 (1:500, NBP3-12,216) antibody was from Novus. Then, the HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (1:5000; Proteintech) was combined with the primary antibody for 30 min. ECL was used to display the membranes.

## Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining

Brain slices were dewaxed with xylene and ethanol, and repaired with citrate solution. Slices were further blocked with goat serum and incubated with anti-TH (1:500) antibody and reacted with second antibody. Eventually, sections were stained with diaminobenzidine (DAB), sealed and photographed with an ortho-fluorescence microscope (Olympus; BX43). The total number of TH-positive cells in the SN area on the injured side was counted. Data were expressed as the number of TH-positive cells.

## Immunocyte fluorescence (IF) staining

MN9D cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and then permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 and blocked with goat serum. Without washing, cells were incubated with anti-TH (1:500) antibody overnight at 4 °C and fluorescent secondary antibody (1:500) for 1 h and DAPI for 10 min. Finally, cells were observed under an orthogonal fluorescence microscope (Olympus; BX53). Data was expressed as mean fluorescence intensity.

## ELISA assay

MN9D cells and midbrain tissues were homogenized and centrifugated to obtain the supernatant. The levels (or enzyme activity) of homovanillic acid (HVA), 3 and 4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), BH4, DA, Adcy5 and Gch1 were detected based on the manufacturer's recommended protocol and the concentration was calculated from the standard curve.

## TH activity assays

Cells were treated with or without 6-OHDA and (or) ART for 24 h. Then, cells were washed  with  PBS  and  replaced  with  100  µL/well  fresh  medium.  The  activities  of TH were measured using assay kit  of  TH  according  to  the  manufacturer's  instruction. Then, absorbance was measured at 450 nm and their activities were calculated according to the formula.

## CCK-8 assay

MN9D cells  were  treated  with  or  without  6-OHDA  and  (or)  ART  for  24  h.  Then, cells  were  washed  with  PBS  and  replaced  with  100  µL/well  fresh  medium.  CCK-8 reagent (10 µL/well) were added and cells were incubated at 37 °C for 90 min. Then, the  absorbances  were  detected  at  450  nm.  Data  was  expressed  as  the  average  of  3 experiments.

## Proteome analysis

Rat  midbrain  tissues  from  6-OHDA  and  6-OHDA + ART  (30  mg/kg)  groups  were taken from -80 °C. Next, protein concentration was measured using BCA kit. Equal protein samples were digested with trypsin (1:50) overnight. Peptides were desalted, dried, and labeled with TMT kit. Then, they were analyzed by HPLC and LC-MS.

LC -MS/MS analysis  was  supported  by  Jingjie  PTM  BioLabs  (Hangzhou,  China). Significantly  different  proteins  (SDP)  were  identified  based  on P val &lt;  0.05  and  |log2 fold change|&gt; 1.

## Non-targeted metabolomics analysis

Rat midbrain tissues in 6-OHDA group and 6-OHDA + ART (30 mg/kg) group from the -80  °C  freezer  were  collected.  Samples  were  thawed  on  ice  and  then  chopped and mixed (all subsequent operations were performed on ice). Beads were added and homogenized with a ball mill (30 HZ) for 20 s. Samples were centrifuged at 3000 r/ min for 30 s at 4 °C and then added to 70% methanolic water internal standard extraction solution and left on ice for 15 min. Subsequently, the supernatant was taken by centrifugation and then used for chromatographic LC-MS analysis. LC -MS/MS analysis was supported by Maiwei Metabolic BioLabs (Wuhan, China). Significantly different metabolites (SDM) were identified based on P val &lt;  0.05 and |log2 fold change|&gt; 1.

## Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)

Total RNA was extracted from the cell samples using Trizol reagents. Transcription was performed with a reverse transcription kit (1:1 to sample volume ratio) based on protocol. RNA levels were normalized to GAPDH. Data were processed with   2 -△△ Ct method. Primer sequences used in this study:

Adcy5:  Forward  (5' -3')  CAG  ACA  GGT  CCT  GGA  GGA  GA,  Reverse  (3' -5')  CTG GAA  AGC  CTG  TCT  CTG  GG;  Gch1:  Forward  (5' -3')  GCC  ATG  CAG  TTC  TTC  ACC AAGG,  Reverse  (3' -5')  ATG  GAA  CCA  AGT  GAT  GCT  CACAC;  GAPDH:  Forward (5' -3')  TGC  ACC  ACC  AAC  TGC  TTA  GC,  Reverse  (3' -5')  GGC  ATG  GAC  TGT  GGT CAT  GAG.

## Cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA)

Briefly, MN9D cells were treated with or without ART (40 μM) for 24 h. Cells were collected and resuspend in PBS. Each group cell suspension was divided into ten parts for ten temperatures (35, 39, 43, 47, 51, 55, 59, 63, 67, 71 °C). Per tube contained 100 μL cell

suspension, heated for 3 min at each temperature, incubated at room temperature for 3 min and placed on ice finally. Cell samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C and supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Then, samples were added with loading buffer and analyzed using western blotting.

## Co-Immunoprecipitation (Co-IP)

Cells were collected after 6-OHDA and (or) ART administration. Cells were lysed with lysis buffer (containing protease inhibitors) and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. A small amount of lysis buffer for Input group was taken. Then, the remaining lysis buffer was divided to two parts, one was added to IgG antibodies (2 μg), the other one was added to Gch1 antibodies (2 μg). All cell lysate incubated overnight at 4 °C by slowly shaking. The pre-treated protein A/G magnetic beads were combined at 4 ℃ for  16  h and magnetic bead samples were collected for western blot analysis.

## MN9D   Adcy5 S1128A ,   Adcy5 G1127A ,   Adcy5 T591A stable cell line establishment

The Flag-tagged    Adcy5 WT ,    Adcy5 S1128A ,    Adcy5 G1127A and    Adcy5 T591A adenovirus  were constructed by Shanghai OBiO Technology Co. Ltd. MN9D cells were spread into 6-well plates at 5 × 10 5 /well for 24 h, and adenovirus (MOI = 10, 1 μL) were added to cells. The virus-containing medium was replaced with fresh medium 4 h later, and the transfection efficiencies were detected 72 h later. Cells were screened with puromycin (4 ug/mL). MN9D cells were treated with or without 6-OHDA and (or) ART for 24 h, and then cells were collected to evaluate the relevant indexes.

## Molecular docking of ART to Adcy5

The structure of ART was obtained from PubChem, and the crystal structure of Adcy5 was  retrieved  from  Protein  Data  Bank.  Subsequently,  the  molecular  docking  analysis were conducted using Schrödinger 2021 software and MOE2021 software, and docking was running under Glide SP (Standard Precision) scoring function using the Schrödinger software to generate 100 binding patterns. All other parameters were set according to the default settings of the Schrödinger software. Moreover, the hydrogenation and conformational information were generated from the node of Protein Preparation Wizard in  Schrödinger  software,  and  the  structure  interaction  fingerprint  type  used  the  PLIF module of MOE software.

## Statistical analysis

All data were expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Statistical comparison was analyzed by unpaired t -test between two groups. One-way analysis of variance  (ANOVA) was applied to multiple groups using SPSS 29.0 software. A value of P &lt;  0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Supplementary Information

The online version contains supplementary material available at https://  doi.  org/  10.  1186/  s13059-  025-  03712-5.

Additional file 1: Supplementary figures

## Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to Prof. Renxiao Wang's group at the School of Pharmacy, Fudan University, for their technical aid in the molecular docking job described in this work.

## Peer review information

Tim Sands was the primary editor of this article and managed its editorial process and peer review in collaboration with the rest of the editorial team. The peer-review history is available in the online version of this article.

## Authors' contributions

FZ and GQW conceived and designed the experiments. XXY and QW participated in the experiments performance and XXY, GQW, YJZ, DDL and FZ finished data analysis. XXY and GQW wrote this manuscript and FZ revised and checked the article. All authors read and revised and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82160690), Science and Technology Foundation of Guizhou Province (No. ZK [2021]-014) and Collaborative Innovation Center of Chinese Ministry of Education (No. 2020-39).

## Data availability

The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (https://  prote omece  ntral.  prote  omexc  hange.  org) via the iProX partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD051535.

## Declarations

## Ethics approval and consent to participate

All animal experiments were performed in accordance with the Chinese Guidelines of Animal Care and Welfare. The experimental protocol was approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Zunyi Medical University (Zunyi, China).

## Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Received: 14 June 2024   Accepted: 24 July 2025