## Brief Communication

[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01937-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01937-y)

## Spatial multimodal analysis of transcriptomes and metabolomes in tissues

Marco Vicari 1 , Reza Mirzazadeh 1 , Anna Nilsson 2 , Reza Shariatgorji 2 , Patrik Bjärterot 2 , Ludvig Larsson 1 , Hower Lee 3 , Mats Nilsson 3 , Julia Foyer 1 , Markus Ekvall 1 , Paulo Czarnewski 1 , Xiaoqun Zhang 4 , Per Svenningsson 4,5 , Lukas Käll 1 , Per E. Andrén 2 &amp; Joakim Lundeberg 1

Received: 19 December 2022

Accepted: 8 August 2023

Published online: 4 September 2023

Check for updates

We present a spatial omics approach that combines histology, mass spectrometry imaging and spatial transcriptomics to facilitate precise measurements of mRNA transcripts and low-molecular-weight metabolites across tissue regions. The workflow is compatible with commercially available Visium glass slides. We demonstrate the potential of our method using mouse and human brain samples in the context of dopamine and Parkinson's disease.

Spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) allows the measurement of genome-wide mRNA expression and provides positional information about the mRNA in a tissue section. Although key aspects of SRT technologies can vary, each technique will ultimately yield a gene-expression count table with tissue coordinates 1-3 . Mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) enables label-free, spatially resolved measurement of the abundance of biomolecules directly from fresh frozen tissue sections 4,5 . In matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI)-MSI, a matrix is applied to the surface of tissue sections mounted onto a glass slide. Focusing a pulsed laser beam onto the tissue section then generates ionic species from the molecules present in the sample surface, enabling the collection of mass-to-charge ( m/z ) spectra at defined raster positions from across the tissue section. Although the SRT and MSI technologies are becoming more popular in spatial biology, they are currently applied as separate methodologies due to experimental constraints such as noncharged, barcoded (in SRT) versus conductive (in MALDI-MSI) microscopy slides, along with the risk of RNA degradation during the harsh MSI process 6,7 . In the present study, we demonstrate the possibility of combining SRT and MALDI-MSI in a single tissue section with retained specificity and sensitivity of both modalities by introducing a spatial multimodal analysis (SMA) protocol.

The SMA workflow comprises the following four steps: (1) sectioning nonembedded snap-frozen samples onto noncharged, barcoded gene expression arrays, (2) MSI by MALDI, (3) hematoxylin and eosin (H&amp;E) staining and bright field microscopy and (4) SRT (Fig. 1a). The SMA workflow does not require any modifications to the commercially available Visium glass slides, nor modifications to the MALDI-MSI or SRT protocols, except for three washes in cold methanol at the end of step 2 to wash away the matrix. To test the feasibility of our method, we assessed whether RNA was still present after tissue exposure to MALDI-MSI by using a slide coated with polydT probes. We mounted coronal sections of a mouse brain and sprayed it with the following four different MALDI matrices: (1) 9-aminoacridine (9-AA) for detection of metabolites in negative ionization mode, (2) 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) for detection of metabolites in positive ionization mode, (3) norharmane for detection of various lipids and (4) 4-(anthracen-9-yl)2-fluoro-1-methylpyridin-1-ium iodide (FMP-10), which charge-tags molecules with phenolic hydroxyls and/or primary amines, including neurotransmitters 8 . We imaged the sections using Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance-MALDI MSI and collected spectra for approximately 3 h at room temperature. Fluorescence microscopy imaging of the cDNA footprint generated during the Tissue Optimization assay (Methods) showed that the captured transcripts correlated well with tissue morphology, indicating that mRNA, surprisingly, is still present after MALDI-MSI in all of the investigated matrices (Extended Data Figs. 1a-c and 2). The presence of mRNA post-MALDI was confirmed using targeted in situ sequencing 9 on coronal mouse sections with FMP-10 on conductive MALDI slides (Extended Data Fig. 1d).

Next, we investigated the reproducibility of SMA. For this purpose, we repeated the experiments using barcoded Visium oligonucleotide slides, which enabled the quantification of individual captured transcripts by sequencing. We used seven consecutive coronal mouse

1 Department of Gene Technology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden. 2 Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Spatial Mass Spectrometry, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. 3 Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm, Sweden. 4 Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Section of Neurology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.  5 Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK. e-mail: per.andren@uu.se; joakim.lundeberg@scilifelab.se

VISIUM

Striatum

FMP-10

9-AA

DHB

Fig. 1 | A multimodal spatial omics approach to investigate metabolites, morphology and gene expression analysis. a , The SMA workflow and quality control design-nonembedded, snap-frozen samples are sectioned and thawmounted onto noncharged, barcoded Visium Gene Expression arrays. Tissue sections are then sprayed with MALDI matrices and MSI is performed. This is followed by H&amp;E staining and imaging with bright field microscopy. Finally, sections are processed for SRT. We also designed the following three types of control samples: (1) MSI-samples processed with standard MALDI-MSI protocol on ITO conductive slides; (2) VISIUM-samples processed with standard Visium protocol on all four capture areas of a Visium Gene Expression array and (3) V-iCTRL-samples processed with Visium protocol, but MALDI-MSI was performed on other capture areas of a Visium Gene Expression array. b , Pairwise gene-to-gene and molecule-to-molecule correlations across brain sections from three different mice, imaged with three different MALDI matrices (9-AA, DHB and FMP-10). We compared MALDI-MSI and gene expression data from matching tissue sections analyzed with MALDI-MSI or Visium, respectively. SMA data analysis demonstrated that the small molecule and gene expression profiles correlated well ( r &gt; 0.74) with the reference data (Fig. 1b). Furthermore, 61.6-98.2% of the molecules were expressed within an absolute log 10 fold change below 0.5 compared to stand-alone MALDI-MSI or Visium (Extended Data Figs. 3 and 4), without appreciable effect on molecule identification and downstream biological analysis. Joint analysis and visualization of transcriptomics data showed that the gene expression integrates well across experimental conditions, with a similar expression of marker genes and high conservation of the spatial clusters (Fig. 1c-e). These results provide strong evidence that SMA can be used with several matrices for simultaneous gene expression and biomolecule profiling.

To further demonstrate the applicability of SMA, we used it on a mouse model of Parkinson's disease (PD). PD is the most common neurodegenerative disorder among the human population after Alzheimer's disease 10,11 . It is characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons within the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc), containing neurons that project to the dorsal putamen of the striatum 12 . In the present study, we aimed to capture both gene expression and corresponding neurotransmitters from two brain regions (SNc and striatum) of three unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-lesioned mice 13 (Fig. 2a,b (i and vi) and Extended Data Fig. 5). As expected, SMA predominantly detected dopamine in the intact striatum and SNc, but not in the lesioned contralateral hemisphere (Fig. 2b (ii and vii)). The multimodal data produced through SMA was also leveraged to identify the expression of genes associated with dopamine expression. Unsurprisingly, the key dopaminergic pathway genes Th , Slc6a3 , Slc18a2 and Ddc were found to be correlated with dopamine expression in the SNc 14 . Likewise, in the striatal sections, the dopamine levels were positively correlated with the expression of genes like Pcp4 and Tac1 and negatively correlated with genes like Penk and Cartpt , suggesting dysregulation of medium spiny neurons (MSNs; Fig. 2b (iv and ix) and 2d (i and ii) and Extended Data Figs. 6 and 7), while corroborating previous findings 15-17 . To substantiate our results, we sought to perform cell-type deconvolution 18 using scRNA-seq data from a mouse brain atlas 19 . Strikingly, we found a lower proportion

Fig. 2 | Spatial multimodal analysis of a Parkinson's disease mouse model and a human postmortem brain affected by Parkinson's disease. a , Cartoon showing the injection of 6-OHDA only in one hemisphere in the MFB. Dashed lines indicate the depth (0.49 and -3.39 mm, distance from bregma) for the substantia nigra and striatum, respectively. b , Representative sections from the substantia nigra and striatum of the mouse PD model. From left to right: cartoon showing the dopamine-depleted regions (i and vi), dopamine expression (ii and vii), H&amp;E staining (iii and viii), spatial gene expression of the gene with the highest biological replicates. Samples are named with short identifiers that reflect the technical conditions under which the sample was analyzed: MSI, stand-alone MALDI-MSI; SMA, SMA protocol; VISIUM, stand-alone Visium. Additional acronyms indicate the matrix used in the SMA protocol (FMP-10, DHB and 9-AA), the sample (m1, m3 or m4) and the serial number of the tissue section (one to nine for each section placed on either ITO or Visium slides). c , UMAP of SMA ST spots colored by sections (left), MALDI matrices (middle) and clusters (right). d , Top three marker genes with highest average log 2 fold change for each spatial cluster across biological replicates. e , Spatial plot of mouse brain tissue sections (striatal level, 0.49 mm from bregma) that illustrates clusters of transcripts for samples sprayed with three different MALDI matrices (FMP-10, 9-AA and DHB) and one sample processed with the stand-alone Visium protocol.

of midbrain dopaminergic neurons MBDOP2 in the lesioned SNc and ventral tegmental area (VTA). A similar phenotype was observed in the lesioned dorsal striatum for MSN1 neurons, a subtype of MSNs (Fig. 2b (v and x)). Furthermore, we were able to specify the localization of multiple neurotransmitters and metabolites, such as taurine, 3-methoxytyramine, 3,4-dihydroxy-phenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL), 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, norepinephrine, serotonin, histidine, tocopherol and gamma-aminobutyric acid (Extended Data Fig. 5). The results demonstrated a similar spatial distribution of molecules as was previously reported in rat models using MALDI-MSI alone 8 .

To demonstrate the relevance of the presented multimodal approach in human specimens, we applied it to a frozen human PD postmortem striatal brain sample and measured neurotransmitters and gene expression over a 2.4 × 0.5 cm tissue section (Fig. 2c (i)). To address and overcome RNA degradation in postmortem material, we applied a recent protocol specifically developed for gene expression measurements from fresh frozen tissue samples with low/moderate RNA quality 20 . The spatial MSI distribution of DA and 3-methoxytyramine (Fig. 2c (ii) and Extended Data Figs. 8 and 9) confirmed our previous findings 8 in that these neurotransmitters were observed at higher levels in the medial division of the ventral caudate nucleus. Multimodal correlation analysis identified SCG2 as the transcript that was most correlated with dopamine abundance (Fig. 2c,d (iv and iii, respectively)). We performed cell-type deconvolution analysis using publicly available snRNAseq data from the caudate nucleus of human postmortem samples 21 , which contains six clusters of MSN neurons (MSN.D1a-c and MSN.D2a-c). Interestingly, similar to our observation in the PD model, MSN.D1b neurons were enriched in the dopamine-expressing region, with a spatial pattern similar to SCG2 (Fig. 2c (v)).

To summarize, we present a method that enables the simultaneous spatial profiling of small molecules and gene expression within a tissue section. Our approach also holds promise for fixed samples and additional modalities such as tagged antibodies 22,23 . The impact of this technology could be extended to other disciplines including oncology. SMA of tumor samples could provide new insights into the dynamic crosstalk that regulates the tumor microenvironment 24 and drives the response to treatment 25 . Gene expression can also be leveraged to infer genomic integrity 26 , which is important to matching tumor clones with drug efficacy. The presented approach provides a further level of multimodality when studying small molecules in a tissue context.

correlation to dopamine (iv and ix), proportions of MSN1 (v) and MBDOP2 (x). The remaining two striatal and two nigral sections processed with SMA and FMP10 present in our dataset show similar results. c , Human postmortem striatum sample. From left to right: images are presented in the same order as in b . The demarcated area indicates the caudate nucleus of the striatum. See Fig. 2 for gene counts statistics. d , From left to right (i, ii and iii): dopamine-to-gene correlations in the mouse substantia nigra, mouse striatum and human striatum. Cd, caudate nucleus; CP, caudoputamen; NS, not significant.

Human striatum

Dopamine

Dopamine m/z 674.28 012345

Dopamine m/z 674.28 0 1 2 3

Cd3

6.5 mm

6.5 mm /

m/z

vii

Cd1

Cd2

500 um

H&amp;E

HE

SCG2

iv

Pcp4

MSN1-D1b

Counts per spot 0 1 2 3

MSN1

Proportion per spot 800

## Online content

Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-023-01937-y.