## Article

[https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-026-04212-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-026-04212-0)

## A quantitative DOPA decarboxylase biomarker for diagnosis in Lewy body disorders

Received: 21 March 2025

## Accepted: 7 January 2026

Published online: 16 February 2026

A list of authors and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper

Accurate diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) remains challenging, with misdiagnosis potentially leading to harmful treatment decisions. DOPA decarboxylase (DDC) shows promise as a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarker for DLB and Parkinson's disease (PD), but quantitative assays are needed for its clinical implementation. Here we report on the development of two DDC immunoassays and the extensive clinical validation of DDC across three clinical cohorts ( n = 740), one biologically defined cohort ( n = 253), one cohort with detailed dopamine transporter imaging information ( n = 102) and one autopsy-confirmed cohort ( n = 78). CSF DDC levels were significantly higher in DLB and PD (up to 2.5-fold versus controls; 1.9-fold versus AD), showing area under the curve values &gt; 0.9 for differential diagnosis. Elevated CSF DDC was linked to the presence, but not severity, of motor impairment. In autopsy-confirmed DLB, higher CSF DDC correlated with progressing α-synuclein pathology and immunohistochemistry in DLB and PD brain tissue revealed colocalization of DDC and α-synuclein in the substantia nigra. These findings underscore DDC's value to support DLB and PD diagnosis, paving the way for its clinical implementation using the here-presented developed immunoassays.

Check for updates

Lewy body disorders (LBDs) including DLB and PD are the second most common neurodegenerative diseases after Alzheimer's Disease (AD) in older people 1 . The pathological hallmark of LBDs is the abnormal aggregation of proteins, lipids and organelles into so-called Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy neurites (LNs). The main constituent of these structures is the misfolded form of alpha-synuclein (α-syn), the first biological anchor in recently suggested characterization systems 2,3 . LBs are present in different brain areas, in the brainstem and/or amygdala in early stages and later also in the neocortex. The exact cause of their formation as well as their role is still not fully understood. The loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra 4 , and related nigrostriatal dopaminergic dysfunction, is another pathological hallmark in LBDs 2,5 . In addition to the pathological similarities, LBDs also share some clinical features, such as motor signs of bradykinesia and rigidity.

e-mail: k.bolsewig@amsterdamumc.nl

While PD is mainly characterized by impaired motor functioning 6 , DLB core features additionally include fluctuations of cognition, visual hallucinations and rapid eye movement REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) 7 , and cognitive impairment/dementia is an overlapping feature with AD. Due to the wide pathological and clinical overlap with AD and the heterogeneous clinical manifestation, an accurate diagnosis of DLB is still challenging 8 . This hampers prediction of the disease course and patient stratification for clinical trials, and can lead to inappropriate treatment approaches with harmful effects on the patients, highlighting the need for disease-specific biomarkers to facilitate DLB diagnosis. Although clinical diagnosis of PD is less ambiguous, biomarkers will allow a deeper understanding of the underlying disease mechanisms to enable early detection, disease monitoring, clinical trial design and biological staging 9 . Disease-specific, quantitative, easily accessible and

cost-efficient fluid biomarkers could support the differential diagnosis of DLB, facilitate DLB and PD research and aid in disease staging and monitoring.

The α-syn seed-amplification assay (αS-SAA) has been shown valuable to detect α-syn pathology already at early disease stages and to predict conversion from nonsymptomatic stages to clinical LBDs 10,11 . αS-SAA-defined co-pathology is present in ~30% of individuals with AD, significantly affecting disease progression and possibly affecting the efficacy of disease-modifying therapies 12,13 . Imaging techniques, such as dopamine transporter (DaT)-Scan, are used to detect nigrostriatal dopaminergic dysfunction 7,14,15 , but these costly techniques are often not reimbursed and require the use of radioactive tracers. A fluid biomarker could thus present advantages in terms of costs and safety.

In recent array-based proteomics studies 16-19 , the protein DDC was identified as a biomarker candidate for DLB and PD 18 . DDC catalyzes the decarboxylation of L-DOPA to dopamine 20 and 5-HTP to serotonin 21 , both of which are impaired in LBDs. DDC levels in CSF were elevated in several LBDs compared with controls and AD, already in early disease stages 17 , predicted progression to disease 16-19 and correlated with markers of disease severity 16,17,19 . Blood DDC levels are strongly influenced by dopaminergic treatment and, therefore, do not reflect the presence of LBDs in the central nervous system 22,23 . However, this feature makes it worthy to investigate DDC as a potential biomarker of dopaminergic treatment response. Altogether, these findings strongly suggest DDC as a fluid biomarker to support diagnosis, prognosis and treatment monitoring in LBDs. To translate these findings for use in clinical practice, scalable and accurate laboratory tests measuring absolute DDC concentrations are imperative. While we found that commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISAs) lack the sensitivity to detect DDC in CSF, a recent preprint reports a mesoscale discovery assay 24 , but shows rather high analytical variability (&lt;30%) 24 .

Here, we report on the development of two robust immunoassays on highly sensitive immunoassay platforms, Ella and Simoa, for DDC quantification in CSF, plasma and serum. We evaluated the diagnostic potential of CSF DDC for the differentiation of DLB and PD from AD and controls, and analyze associations with αS-SAA status, cognitive dysfunction, DaT imaging, disease severity measures and paired plasma DDC levels. Moreover, we studied DDC tissue expression in relation to relevant pathological features in DLB and PD. Our findings suggest that DDC measured with our immunoassays may serve as a supportive biomarker for the diagnosis of LBDs and gives insights into its association with cognition, clinical features and pathology markers.

## Results

## DDC biomarker assay development and analytical validation

We developed immunoassays for the detection of DDC in CSF on two platforms: the Ella and Simoa systems (Supplementary Methods 1). The Simoa assay was additionally optimized for use in plasma and serum. All assays demonstrated strong analytical performance, meeting international consensus guidelines 25 . Analytical validation results of the Ella assay (Supplementary Methods 2 and Fig. 1a-e) were an intra-assay coefficient of variation of 4.1%, inter-assay coefficient of variation of 11.5%, parallelism ranging from 85% to 108% (Fig. 1a), dilution linearity between 86% and 117% (Fig. 1b) and spike recovery of 121% (high spike), 85% (medium spike) and 333% (low spike; Fig. 1c). Analytical validation results of the Simoa assay in CSF (Supplementary Methods 2 and Fig. 1f-j) were an intra-assay coefficient of variation of 4.3%, inter-assay coefficient of variation of 12.4%, parallelism ranging from 84% to 87% (Fig. 1f), dilution linearity between 86% and 114% (Fig. 1g) and spike recovery of 95% (high spike), 99% (medium spike) and 84% (low spike; Fig. 1h) and results for the Simoa assay in plasma (Fig. 1k-o) were an intra-assay coefficient of variation of 7.4%, inter-assay coefficient of variation of 12.3%, parallelism ranging from 99% to 101% (Fig. 1k), dilution linearity between 88% and 118% (Fig. 1l) and spike recovery of 95% (high spike), 97% (medium spike) and 70% (low spike; Fig. 1m).

In addition, the Simoa assay for use in serum also met the acceptance criteria, results of which are summarized in Extended Data Fig. 1a-e and Supplementary Methods 3.

We measured CSF DDC in six independent cohorts, and in paired plasma samples in one cohort. DDC levels were above the detection limit in 100% of the samples. Demographic characteristics of the included fluid cohorts are summarized in Extended Data Tables 1-3.

In two of these cohorts (Amsterdam Dementia Cohort (ADC) Discovery and UNIPG αS-SAA), we measured CSF DDC with both of the immunoassays. DDC measurements correlated strongly between the two platforms (ADC Discovery: ρ = 0.95, P = 6.06 × 10 -73 ; UNIPG αS-SAA: ρ = 0.842, P = 1.13 × 10 -58 ), with a proportional difference between the Ella and Simoa measurements, that is, higher absolute concentrations being measured on the Ella assay (Extended Data Fig. 1f,g).

We observed strong correlations between proximity extension assay (PEA) DDC measurements and our in-house-developed assays ( ρ = 0.7-0.97, P = 4.86 × 10 -37 -1.43 × 10 -63 ; Extended Data Fig. 1h-k). Taken together, we have developed two DDC immunoassays for use in CSF (Ella and Simoa) and plasma/serum (Simoa), which demonstrate strong analytical performance and correlate with each other, and PEA results.

## DDC concentrations differentiate clinically defined DLB and PD from controls and AD

To assess the diagnostic accuracy of CSF DDC in a memory clinic setting, we first assessed CSF DDC concentrations in clinically defined cohorts from different memory clinics: the ADC Discovery reflects part of the discovery cohort from our previous proteomics study. The ADC/Sant Pau Initiative on Neurodegeneration (SPIN) Validation is a multicenter cohort and was also part of the previous proteomics study (controls, n = 108; DLB, n = 106; mild cognitive impairment with underlying amyloid pathology (MCI-A+), n = 101; AD, n = 104). Due to the pathological and clinical similarities between DLB and PD, and previously reported elevated CSF DDC concentrations in both of these diseases, we additionally included a DLB/PD cohort from the Danish Dementia Biobank and Bispebjerg Movement Disorder Biobank (DDBB/ BMDB Validation), including patients with DLB and PD. DDC CSF concentrations were significantly elevated in all cohorts within the DLB and PD groups compared to controls (fold changes 1.6 to 2.4) and AD (fold changes 1.2 to 1.9; ADC Discovery Ella: F (2) = 42.3, P = 4.94 × 10 -15 ; Simoa: F (2) = 35.2, P = 4.47 × 10 -13 ; ADC/SPIN Validation on Ella: F (3) = 12.0, P = 1.51 × 10 -7 ; DDBB/BMDB Validation: F (3) = 33.91, P = 2.85 × 10 -17 ; Extended Data Table 4 and Fig. 2a-d). We also observed slightly elevated CSF DDC levels in AD compared to controls in ADC/SPIN and DDBB/ BMDB Validation. CSF DDC concentrations in PD were slightly elevated compared to DLB in the DDBB/BMDB Validation. Of note, n = 20 of these patients with PD (54%) received dopaminergic treatment.

We assessed the potential of CSF DDC for differential diagnosis of DLB and PD from other groups by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. The models including DDC, age and sex discriminated DLB and PD with area under the curve (AUC) values of 0.94 to 0.97 from controls and with AUCs of 0.70 to 0.94 from patients with AD, independently of the platform used (Fig. 2i-l and Table 1). See model performances for models including DDC, or age and sex, alone in Extended Data Table 5. These results highlight the diagnostic potential of CSF DDC in a clinically defined patient population that reflects individuals commonly seen in memory clinics.

## DDC concentrations differentiate biologically and pathologically defined patients with DLB and PD from controls and AD

We next measured CSF DDC in two cohorts including patients with PD + DLB who were biologically confirmed through αS-SAA measurements and patients with DLB who were pathologically confirmed. Also in these cohorts, we observed that CSF DDC was significantly elevated

Fig. 1 | Results of analytical validation of Ella and Simoa DDC assays in CSF and plasma. a -o , Visual presentation of analytical validation results of the in-housedeveloped Ella and Simoa assays for the parameters parallelism ( a (Ella, CSF), f (Simoa, CSF) and k (Simoa, plasma)), dilution linearity ( b (Ella, CSF), g (Simoa, CSF) and l (Simoa, plasma)), recovery ( c (Ella, CSF), h (Simoa, CSF) and m (Simoa, plasma)), freeze-thawing stability ( d (Ella, CSF), i (Simoa, CSF) and n (Simoa, plasma)) and

storage stability ( e (Ella, CSF), j (Simoa, CSF) and o (Simoa, plasma)). Mean recovery and corresponding standard deviation (error bars in c (Ella, CSF), h (Simoa, CSF) and m (Simoa, plasma)) were calculated based on three (only medium spike recovery of Ella assay) or four individual CSF or plasma samples. For all parameters, a range of 85% to 115% compared to the reference condition was accepted. AEB, average number of enzymes per bead; RFU, relative fluorescence unit; RT, room temperature.

in the PD + DLB and DLB groups compared with controls (fold changes of 1.8 to 2.2) and AD (fold changes of 1.5 to 1.9; UNIPG αS-SAA on Ella: F (2) = 38.8, P = 4.51 × 10 -15 , and Simoa: F (2) = 79.7, P = 2.92 × 10 -27 ; BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy: F (2) = 11.5, P = 4.52 × 10 -5 ; Fig. 2e-g). Of note, the PD + DLB group in UNIPG αS-SAA included patients on dopaminergic treatment (Extended Data Table 2). Previous studies have shown that dopaminergic treatment can further elevate CSF DDC concentrations. Hence, we repeated the analysis in the UNIPG αS-SAA Cohort stratifying the PD + DLB group for use of dopaminergic treatment. We did not observe differences in CSF DDC levels between the different PD + DLB subgroups (Extended Data Fig. 1l,m), but CSF DDC levels were higher in treated patients compared with drug-naive patients (fold changes 1.2 (Ella) and 1.4 (Simoa)). However, CSF DDC concentrations were still significantly higher in the drug-naive PD + DLB group compared with controls and AD (Fig. 2e,f).

Regarding diagnostic performance, DDC combined with age and sex discriminated PD + DLB with AUCs of 0.89 (Ella) and 0.93 (Simoa) from controls and from patients with AD with AUCs of 0.90 (Ella) and 0.92 (Simoa). ROC analysis in drug-naive patients only, led to slightly lower, yet high AUCs of 0.87 (Ella) and 0.91 (Simoa) for the discrimination from controls and 0.87 (Ella) and 0.90 (Simoa) for the discrimination from AD (Fig. 2m,n and Table 1). In the BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy, the AUC was 0.998 for the combined model to discriminate DLB from controls and 0.87 to discriminate DLB from AD (Fig. 2o and Table 1). AUCs for models including only DDC, or age and sex, are reported in Extended Data Table 5. Taken together, the results verify the high diagnostic potential for CSF DDC in biologically and pathologically defined patient groups.

## Plasma DDC does not have diagnostic potential

Blood-based biomarkers are less invasive than CSF biomarkers and show high diagnostic potential in AD. Therefore, we next assessed the diagnostic value of plasma DDC in the αS-SAA-defined cohort (UNIPG). We did not observe altered plasma DDC levels between diagnostic groups ( F (2) = 2.8, P = 0.066; without correction for use of dopaminergic treatment), but we observed elevated levels in patients with PD + DLB on dopaminergic treatment (Fig. 2h and Extended Data Table 4). These results underline that plasma DDC is strongly influenced by dopaminergic treatment and holds no diagnostic potential for DLB and PD.

## Robustness of results and estimation of reference values

Subsequently, we conducted a meta-analysis combining data from all cohorts, showing large overall effect sizes for the comparison of DLB and PD versus controls (standardized mean difference (SMD) = 1.41 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.92 to 1.89); I 2 = 78.7%, P = 0.003; Fig. 2p), as well as DLB and PD versus AD (SMD = 1.00 (95% CI 0.55 to 1.44); I 2 = 83.5%, P = 2.36 × 10 -6 ; Fig. 2q). These findings indicate that CSF DDC levels are robustly elevated in DLB and PD, with values approximately 1.41 standard deviations higher than in controls and 1.00 standard deviation higher than in AD.

## Fig. 2 | CSF DDC levels across diagnostic groups and ROC analysis. a -h , Box

plots illustrate DDC levels across diagnostic groups in the ADC Discovery (CTRL, n = 50; DLB, n = 41; AD, n = 51; a (CSF Ella) and b (CSF Simoa)), ADC/SPIN Validation (CTRL, n = 108; DLB, n = 106; MCI-A+, n = 101; AD, n = 104; c ), DDBB/ BMDB Validation (CTRL, n = 44; DLB, n = 46; PD, n = 37; AD, n = 52; d ), UNIPG αS-SAA (CSF Ella: CTRL, n = 51; PD + DLB (DN), n = 36; PD + DLB (T), n = 19; AD, n = 110 ( e ); CSF Simoa: CTRL, n = 60; PD + DLB (DN), n = 48; PD + DLB (T), n = 27; AD(S-), n = 110 ( f )), BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy (CTRL, n = 30; DLB, n = 18; AD, n = 30; g ) and the plasma UNIPG αS-SAA (CTRL, n = 18, PD + DLB (DN), n = 32; PD + DLB (T), n = 20; AD, n = 22; h ). i -o , ROC curves for the differentiation of DLB and PD from the other diagnostic groups based on DDC levels are shown for the ADC Discovery ( i (CSF Ella) and j (CSF Simoa)), ADC/SPIN Validation ( k ), DDBB/ BMDB Validation ( l ), UNIPG αS-SAA in CSF ( m (CSF Ella) and n (CSF Simoa)) and the BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy ( o ). p , q , Meta-analyses of SMDs between DLB

We further evaluated stability of Youden cutoff values. Cutoff values on the Ella platform showed variation, but cutoff values on the Simoa platform were remarkably consistent for the differentiation of DLB and PD from controls (ADC Discovery: 27.1 pg ml -1 , DDBB/BMDB Validation DLB : 31.1 pg ml -1 , DDBB/BMDB ValidationPD : 31.5 pg ml -1 , UNIPG αS-SAA: 29.4 pg ml -1 ) and from AD (ADC Discovery: 27.7 pg ml -1 , DDBB/BMDB ValidationDLB: 30.1 pg ml -1 , DDBB/BMDB ValidationPD: 30.3 pg ml -1 , UNIPG αS-SAA: 28.0 pg ml -1 ; Extended Data Table 5).

## Association with cognition and clinical features

Associations of DDC with cognition were analyzed within the DLB and PD groups. In the ADC Discovery, higher CSF DDC levels were associated with higher Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores when measured with Simoa ( β Ella (s.e.) = -0.35 (0.21), P = 0.104, Fig. 3a; β Simoa (s.e.) = -0.51 (0.25), P = 0.047, Fig. 3b; of note, estimated values are negative due to transformation of MMSE scores). In a subset of patients with DLB from the ADC Validation ( n = 29), we observed an association at a trend level of higher CSF DDC levels with lower Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scores ( β (s.e.) = -9.4 (5.50), P = 0.100; Fig. 3d). No associations of CSF DDC with cognitive scores were observed in the other cohorts (Fig. 3c,e-g).

Information on the presence of DLB core features was available in the DLB group of the ADC and SPIN cohorts (Extended Data Table 6). We observed higher CSF DDC levels in patients with DLB presenting with parkinsonian symptoms compared with those without ( β = 0.13 (95% CI: 0.018 to 0.233), P = 0.023; Fig. 3h) and in patients with visual hallucinations compared to patients without hallucinations ( β = 0.107 (95% CI: 0.034 to 0.180), P = 0.005; Fig. 3i)). No significant associations with DDC have been observed for the presence or absence of the other two DLB core features, that is, fluctuations of cognition and RBD (Fig. 3j,k).

We next assessed if there was a linear association to motor impairment severity, as measured with the unified Parkinson disease rating scale part 3 (UPDRS-III) scale, in UNIPG αS-SAA and YUHS DaT-positron emission tomography (PET). There was no association between DDC concentrations and motor impairment in either cohort (UNIPG: β Ella (s.e.) = -10.30 (10.84), P = 0.348; β Simoa (s.e.) = -8.75 (7.35), P = 0.238; and YUHS: β (s.e.) = 8.82 (5.06), P = 0.084; Fig. 3l-n).

## Association with dopaminergic treatment and imaging

As we have observed significantly higher DDC concentrations in patients with PD + DLB under dopaminergic treatment compared to drug-naive patients, we analyzed a possible relation between CSF DDC and dopaminergic treatment dosage expressed as levodopa equivalent daily dosage (LEDD). Information on LEDD was available in the UNIPG αS-SAA and the YUHS DaT-PET cohorts. We did not observe an association between LEDD and CSF DDC concentrations in treated patients of either cohort (UNIPG: β Ella (s.e.) = -0.048 (0.120), P = 0.696; β Simoa (s.e.) = -0.152 (0.147), P = 0.312; YUHS: β (s.e.) = -0.094 (0.210), P = 0.657).

and PD and controls ( p ) and AD-continuum ( q ) are visualized by forest plots. DDC differences between diagnostic groups were assessed across groups by analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) corrected for age and sex (and center in ADC/ SPIN Validation) with two-sided post hoc Tukey's test and Bonferroni correction. Box plots show DDC levels across diagnostic groups. Lines through the boxes indicate the median value, and lower and upper lines correspond to the first and third quartiles, respectively. Dots represent individual data points, and whiskers extend to 1.5 times the interquartile range. Forest plots indicate the SMD of twosided group comparisons in different diagnostic cohorts and whiskers indicate confidence intervals. Diamonds indicate the pooled effects with confidence intervals. DN, drug-naive; MCI-A+, mild cognitive impairment with underlying amyloid pathology; S-, normal seed-amplification assay; S+, abnormal seedamplification assay; T, treated with dopaminergic medication.

Table 1 | Accuracy parameters of ROC analysis. Predictors include age, sex and log10-transformed DDC concentrations

| Cohort                                  |                        |   AUC |   Specificity |   Sensitivity |   Positivepredictivevalue |   Negativepredictivevalue |
| ADCDiscoveryCohort (CSF, Ella)          | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.966 |          0.94 |          0.93 |                      0.93 |                      0.94 |
| ADCDiscoveryCohort (CSF, Ella)          | DLBversusAD            | 0.939 |          0.9  |          0.88 |                      0.88 |                      0.9  |
| ADCDiscoveryCohort (CSF,Simoa)          | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.96  |          0.94 |          0.93 |                      0.93 |                      0.94 |
| ADCDiscoveryCohort (CSF,Simoa)          | DLBversusAD            | 0.945 |          0.88 |          0.9  |                      0.86 |                      0.92 |
| ADC/SPINValidationCohort (CSF, Ella)    | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.96  |          0.95 |          0.88 |                      0.95 |                      0.89 |
| ADC/SPINValidationCohort (CSF, Ella)    | DLBversus MCI-A+       | 0.782 |          0.89 |          0.64 |                      0.86 |                      0.71 |
| ADC/SPINValidationCohort (CSF, Ella)    | DLBversusAD            | 0.762 |          0.73 |          0.72 |                      0.74 |                      0.73 |
| DDBB/BMDBValidation Cohort(CSF,Simoa)   | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.937 |          0.88 |          0.83 |                      0.89 |                      0.82 |
| DDBB/BMDBValidation Cohort(CSF,Simoa)   | DLBversusAD            | 0.702 |          0.56 |          0.83 |                      0.63 |                      0.78 |
| DDBB/BMDBValidation Cohort(CSF,Simoa)   | PDversus CTRL          | 0.947 |          1    |          0.89 |                      1    |                      0.91 |
| DDBB/BMDBValidation Cohort(CSF,Simoa)   | PDversusAD             | 0.823 |          0.75 |          0.86 |                      0.71 |                      0.89 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLBversus CTRL      | 0.894 |          0.88 |          0.89 |                      0.88 |                      0.78 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLBversusAD         | 0.895 |          0.78 |          0.91 |                      0.68 |                      0.95 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLB(DN) versus CTRL | 0.867 |          0.82 |          0.78 |                      0.76 |                      0.84 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLB(DN) versusAD    | 0.872 |          0.74 |          0.92 |                      0.53 |                      0.96 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF,Simoa)           | PD+DLBversus CTRL      | 0.93  |          0.88 |          0.93 |                      0.79 |                      0.91 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF,Simoa)           | PD+DLBversusAD         | 0.917 |          0.84 |          0.88 |                      0.79 |                      0.91 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF,Simoa)           | PD+DLB(DN) versus CTRL | 0.91  |          0.87 |          0.88 |                      0.84 |                      0.9  |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF,Simoa)           | PD+DLB(DN) versusAD    | 0.897 |          0.84 |          0.85 |                      0.69 |                      0.93 |
| BIODEM/UAntwerpAutopsy Cohort(CSF,Ella) | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.998 |          0.97 |          1    |                      0.95 |                      1    |
| BIODEM/UAntwerpAutopsy Cohort(CSF,Ella) | DLBversusAD            | 0.872 |          0.9  |          0.78 |                      0.82 |                      0.87 |

CTRL, controls; DN, drug-naive.

We further assessed if CSF DDC measurements are related to DaT imaging. DaT-Scan results were available for a subset of the DLB group in the ADC and SPIN cohorts (Extended Data Table 6). There was no significant difference in DDC concentrations within the DLB group between patients with normal ( n = 10) or abnormal ( n = 38; F (1) = 0.170, P = 0.683, β = 0.026 (95% CI: -0.102 to 0.154); Fig. 3o) DaT-Scan results. Similar results were found in the YUHS DaT-PET regarding DaT-PET status (normal = 24, abnormal = 78, F (1) = 0.279, P = 0.598, Fig. 3p and Supplementary Methods 4). We did not observe an association between CSF DDC levels and DaT uptake, as represented by median 18 F-FP-CIT PET standardized uptake value ratios, in the caudate or putamen within the whole cohort ( n = 102) or only drug-naive patients ( n = 60), respectively (Extended Data Table 7 and Fig. 3q,r). However, we observed that higher CSF DDC levels were associated with a lower caudate/putamen DaT uptake ratio in drug-naive patients ( β (s.e.) = -0.201 (0.060), P = 0.0015, q = 0.0045; Extended Data Table 7 and Fig. 3s).

## Association with AD co-pathology

Since CSF DDC concentrations were also elevated in patients with AD and AD co-pathology is a common feature in DLB and PD, we assessed the relationship between CSF DDC and AD pathology based on the AD CSF core biomarkers Aβ42 (ADC, DDBB/BMDB Validation and BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy) or Aβ42/40 (SPIN, UNIPG αS-SAA), pTau181 (all cohorts) and tTau (all cohorts) in the overall cohorts and the DLB and PD groups, respectively.

DDC was negatively associated with amyloid in the ADC/SPIN Validation. In patients from the ADC, CSF DDC was associated with Aβ42 within all diagnoses together ( β (s.e.) = -0.11 (0.05), P = 0.028), and in patients with DLB from the SPIN, DDC was associated with Aβ42/40 ( β (s.e.) = -2.09 (0.87), P = 0.020). DDC and pTau were positively associated in the PD + DLB group of the UNIPG αS-SAA (Simoa, β (s.e.) = 0.26 (0.12), P = 0.026). In the BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy, a positive association of DDC and tTau was observed in the whole cohort

( β (s.e.) = 0.21 (0.10), P = 0.037), while in the DDBB/BMDB Validation a positive association was observed in the PD group ( β (s.e.) = 0.54 (0.16), P = 0.007). When stratifying for AD CSF biomarker status, we confirmed that amyloid-positive patients with DLB had higher CSF DDC levels than amyloid-negative patients in ADC/SPIN Validation ( F (1) = 7.7, P = 0.007; β = 0.09 (95% CI: 0.02-0.15)). Besides that, AD CSF biomarker-positive patients had similar CSF DDC levels compared with AD CSF biomarker-negative patients. Overall, while associations between CSF DDC and certain AD CSF biomarkers were observed in some cohorts, these findings were not consistent across all study cohorts.

## Association with α-syn pathology

To assess the association of CSF DDC with α-syn, we first analyzed if elevated CSF DDC levels in AD are related to LB pathology by comparing DDC concentrations between αS-SAA normal ( n = 54) and αS-SAA abnormal ( n = 56) patients with AD. CSF DDC levels did not significantly differ regarding the αS-SAA status, but a trend toward higher CSF DDC in αS-SAA positive patients with AD was observed when measured by Simoa ( β Ella (s.e.) = -1.31 (4.97), P = 0.793; β Simoa (s.e.) = 2.41 (1.59), P = 0.134; Fig. 4a,b). We next evaluated this relation in pathologically confirmed patients with AD within the BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy. Here, patients with AD and LB co-pathology had higher CSF DDC concentrations than patients with pure AD ( β (s.e.) = 0.21 (0.08), P = 0.014; Fig. 4c). Next, we analyzed CSF DDC levels in relation to LB pathology, based on the regional LB stage, α-syn Braak stages and α-syn load in different brain areas. We observed higher CSF DDC levels in patients (DLB and AD) with LB pathology in the limbic and neocortical brain areas compared to patients with AD without LB co-pathology ( F (3) = 5.64, P = 0.002; Fig. 4d) and higher CSF DDC levels were associated with higher α-syn Braak stages ( F (5) = 5.05, P = 0.001; Fig. 4e). In addition, CSF DDC correlated with α-syn load in various brain regions, with the strongest correlation in the substantia nigra ( P = 0.66, P = 5.36 × 10 -7 ; Fig. 4f).

These results indicate that CSF DDC concentrations increase with disease progression and with increasing LB pathology, particularly in the brainstem.

## DDC characterization in human brain tissue

As results from the BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy suggest an association of higher CSF DDC concentrations with more pronounced LB pathology in specifically the brainstem (substantia nigra), we next analyzed the (co)localization of DDC and α-syn within brainstem tissue from controls ( n = 4), patients with DLB ( n = 4) and PD (dementia) (PD(D); n = 4), using the detection antibody of our immunoassays. Demographics and neuropathological characteristics of the tissue donors are listed in Extended Data Table 8. Of note, staining was interpreted qualitatively by visual inspection to assess presence, distribution and relative intensity of the target antigens. Positive DDC signal was detected within the nucleus, soma and processes of dopaminergic neurons, as indicated by overlapping DDC, tyrosine hydroxylase (stains dopaminergic neurons) and neuromelanin (abundant in dopaminergic neurons of substantia nigra) positivity in these cells (Fig. 5a-g and Extended Data Fig. 2a-f). Positive DDC staining was sparsely observed in tyrosine hydroxylase-negative cells in all groups. Positive DDC signal was also detected in the nucleus, soma and processes of serotonergic neurons in the raphe nuclei (Supplementary Methods 5 and Extended Data Fig. 2g-j). In all patients, DDC positivity was present within LBs, LNs and pale bodies in dopaminergic neurons (Fig. 5e-g,l,m,p,q,t,u). Furthermore, DDC colocalized with phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn staining in these neurons (Fig. 5h-w). While fewer DDC-positive cells were observed in the DLB and PD groups, strong DDC signal was observed in the nucleus and soma of remaining neurons and within LBs and LNs. These findings show that DDC colocalizes with α-syn, that tyrosine hydroxylase-negative cells still express DDC and that DDC is also detected in serotonergic neurons.

## Discussion

In the present study we show the clinical value of CSF DDC as a biomarker for DLB and PD and introduce two quantitative immunoassays advancing clinical implementation. We developed two robust in-house immunoassays to measure DDC in CSF (and plasma and serum) with high analytical sensitivity (100% detectability) and excellent technical performance, correlating strongly with PEA measurements. We validated the use of CSF DDC in six cohorts: three clinical cohorts, one DaT imaging cohort, one biologically defined cohort and one autopsy-confirmed DLB and PD patient cohort, consistently showing significantly elevated CSF DDC levels in the DLB and PD groups and demonstrating high AUCs of up to 0.93 for differential diagnosis throughout. Stable cutoff values of ~30 pg ml -1 , to differentiate DLB and PD from the other groups, were observed with the Simoa assay.

## Fig. 3 | Associations of DDC with cognition, DLB core features, motor

impairment and DaT imaging. a -s , DDC levels were borderline associated with MMSE in the ADC Discovery ( a (Ella) and b (Simoa)), but not in the ADC/ SPIN Validation ( c ) and the DDBB/BMDB Validation ( e ), or with MoCA in the ADC Validation ( d ) and UNIPG αS-SAA ( f (Ella) and g (Simoa)) within DLB and PD (DLB ADC Discovery, n = 41; DLB ADC/SPIN Validation, n = 106; DLB DDBB/BMDB Validation, n = 46; PD DDBB/BMDB Validation, n = 37; PD + DLB UNIPG αS-SAA (CSF Ella), n = 55; PD + DLB UNIPG αS-SAA (CSF Simoa), n = 75). Associations of CSF DDC with DLB core features were analyzed within the DLB group of the ADC/ SPIN Validation. Patients with DLB that presented with parkinsonism ( h ; n = 70) or visual hallucinations ( i ; n = 48) had higher CSF DDC levels than patients without these features ( n without parkinsonism = 11, n without hallucinations = 31). No association was observed between CSF DDC and the other core features fluctuations of cognition ( n with fluctuations of cognition = 53, n without fluctuations of cognition = 18; j ) and RBD ( n with RBD = 42, n without RBD = 32; k ). No association with CSF DDC and UPDRS-III scores was observed in the UNIPG

αS-SAA (

Ella = 55,

Simoa = 75;

(Ella) and

(Simoa)) or YUHS DaT-PET (

). CSF DDC did not differ between DaT imaging normal and abnormal status

Within participants that largely presented with cognitive impairment and parkinsonian symptoms, CSF DDC was not associated with normal/ abnormal DaT imaging status, but higher CSF DDC was associated with a lower caudate/putamen DaT uptake ratio. Higher CSF DDC values were related with the presence of parkinsonism and visual hallucinations in DLB, but were not associated with motor impairment severity in PD + DLB. Furthermore, we show that CSF DDC concentrations increased with more pronounced α-syn pathology, that DDC colocalized with phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn, and show DDC positivity in dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons in human postmortem brainstem tissue.

We show that CSF DDC was significantly elevated in DLB and PD compared with controls, MCI-A+ and AD, and our meta-analysis showed strong pooled effect sizes for the comparison of DLB and PD versus controls and DLB and PD versus AD, which further underscores the robustness of DDC differences across diagnostic groups. Upon addition of DDC to basic demographic models including age and sex as predictors, these AUCs increased further, reaching 0.97 in clinically defined cohorts and 0.998 in the autopsy-confirmed cohort. These findings are in concordance with previous proteomics studies 16 , but now measured by scalable methods, with stable cutoff values advancing clinical implementation. We observed slightly higher CSF DDC concentrations in patients receiving dopaminergic treatment compared to drug-naive patients, both in CSF and plasma. Similar findings have been reported previously 17,19,23 . However, DDC levels in CSF were still significantly upregulated in drug-naive patients, and this factor can likely be disregarded in the context of initial diagnosis, as patients will still be drug-naive. Upregulation was only observed in plasma of dopaminergic-treated patients, confirming our previous findings on limited diagnostic utility in plasma 22 . Our findings suggest that CSF DDC is a promising biomarker to support clinical DLB and PD diagnosis, ultimately facilitating and improving the diagnostic process.

CSF DDC levels were slightly elevated in patients with AD (fold change up to 1.5). LB co-pathology is a frequent feature observed in ~30% of patients with AD 26-28 as confirmed by CSF αS-SAA analysis 12,13 . In the BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy, we observed that patients with AD and LB co-pathology had significantly higher CSF DDC levels than those patients with pure AD. When using the αS-SAA, we observed trend-level differences in patients with AD with or without LB pathology. These findings suggest that LB co-pathology in AD might not be the only cause for elevated DDC levels in AD, or may affect CSF DDC differently than in DLB/PD. One possible explanation is that AD and DLB/PD affect distinct brain regions, potentially dysregulating DDC expression in different ways even when LB co-pathology is present. Additionally, since DDC is also involved in serotonin synthesis, and serotonin deficits occur both in DLB/PD and AD, this could contribute to increases in CSF DDC levels in pure AD cases. Elevated CSF DDC levels have also

( n DaT-Scan normal/abnormal = 10/38 ( o ), n DaT-PET normal/abnormal = 24/78 ( p )). In drug-naive patients ( n = 60), no association between CSF DDC and 18 F-FPCIT uptake in the caudate ( q ) or putamen ( r ) was observed, respectively, but higher CSF DDC concentrations were associated with lower caudate/putamen 18 F-FP-CIT uptake ratios ( s ). Associations with cognitive scores and median 18 F-FPCIT standardized uptake value ratio (SUVRs) were assessed by linear regression corrected for age, sex and education (when available) and associations with UPDRS-III scores were assessed by linear regression corrected for age, sex, LEDD and disease duration. Regression lines with 95% CIs of cognition models are presented in DLB (light red), PD (dark red) and PD + DLB (red) and of models for motor impairment in PD + DLB (gray). Associations of CSF DDC with clinical DLB core features and DaT imaging status were assessed by ANCOVA, corrected for age and sex, with two-sided post hoc Tukey's test. Box plots represent DDC levels, lines through the boxes represent the median value, and lower and upper lines correspond to the first and third quartiles, respectively. Dots represent individual data points and whiskers extend to 1.5 times the interquartile range. Adj., adjusted.

been shown in atypical parkinsonian disorders (multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal syndrome), albeit lower than in LBD 17 . These disorders, similarly to DLB and PD, exhibit varying degrees of dopamine and serotonin deficits. However, they do not have underlying α-syn pathology (progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal syndrome 29 ), or in the case of multiple system atrophy, α-syn pathology differs from that observed in DLB and PD to an extent that it can be challenging to detect it with αS-SAA 30-32 . Therefore,

Fig. 4 | Associations of CSF DDC with α-syn pathology. a -f , In the UNIPG αS-SAA Cohort, no significant difference of CSF DDC was observed between αS-SAA normal ( n = 54) and αS-SAA abnormal ( n = 56; a (Ella) and b (Simoa)) patients with AD. In the BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy Cohort (DLB, n = 18; AD, n = 30), higher CSF DDC levels were associated with LB co-pathology in AD ( c ), Lewy pathology in the limbic and neocortical brain areas ( d ) and higher α-syn Braak stages ( e ), and correlated with α-syn load in various brain regions ( f ). Associations of CSF DDC with αS-SAA status, LB co-pathology in AD, Lewy pathology and α-syn Braak

CSF DDC could possibly be a valuable biomarker to better define and distinguish these atypical parkinsonian syndromes from each other, which requires more research. Following this hypothesis, it may also be worth investigating CSF DDC in psychiatric disorders affecting the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems, such as major depressive disorder 33 or schizophrenia, particularly considering the fact that DDC is also involved in the production of serotonin 20 .

Dopaminergic imaging by DaT-Scan is a supportive biomarker for the diagnosis of DLB. We did not observe an association between CSF DDC and normal/abnormal DaT-Scan and DaT-PET, nor with DaT uptake in the caudate or putamen in patients with DLB, respectively, in line with previously reported findings for DDC in PD 24,34 . However, we observed that higher CSF DDC concentrations were associated with lower caudate/putamen DaT uptake ratios. Previous studies have shown that patients with DLB present with lower caudate/putamen DaT uptake ratios than patients with PD 35,36 . Given that almost all participants in the YUHS DaT-PET cohort were cognitively impaired with additional parkinsonian symptoms, we hypothesize that here elevated CSF DDC may reflect more widespread dopaminergic degeneration, including involvement of the caudate nucleus, likely related to the presence of cognitive impairment and, consistent with a DLB-like dopaminergic pattern, in contrast to a pattern involving mainly the putamen in PD.

In pathologically confirmed patients, we observed higher CSF DDC levels in patients with limbic and neocortical LB stages compared to patients with AD without LB pathology. Additionally, CSF DDC was associated with higher α-syn Braak stages and correlated with α-syn

stages were assessed by ANCOVA, corrected for age and sex, with two-sided post hoc Tukey's test. Box plots represent DDC levels, lines through the boxes represent the median value, and lower and upper lines correspond to the first and third quartiles, respectively. Dots represent individual data points, and whiskers extend to 1.5 times the interquartile range. Correlation of CSF DDC with α-syn load was analyzed in different brain regions by Spearman correlation. Positive correlation coefficients are indicated by the blue color and the size of the dots indicates strength of correlation. S-/S+, αS-SAA normal/abnormal.

load in various brain regions, particularly in the substantia nigra, corroborating our previous findings 16 . Our findings further show that DDC colocalizes with phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn in the substantia nigra. While colocalization alone does not confirm a functional interaction, this spatial proximity, particularly within LBs and LNs, raises the possibility of an interplay between these proteins. α-synuclein pathology has been proposed to possibly interfere with the dopaminergic pathway, by increasing the risk of developing neuronal dopaminergic dysfunction 2 . This rationale is further supported by findings of previous studies that associated abnormal α-syn production with decreased DDC activity 37 . A decrease in DDC activity and resulting shortage of dopamine could lead to a compensatory overproduction of DDC in remaining neurons, which could be an explanation for the elevated concentrations observed in CSF, as suggested previously 19 . Supporting this hypothesis is the here-observed positive correlation of CSF DDC levels with α-syn in the substantia nigra, where loss of dopaminergic neurons is most pronounced. A positive correlation between CSF DDC and α-syn could hence indicate an overproduction of DDC in the remaining neurons. Another possible explanation for elevated CSF DDC could be ongoing degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in DLB and PD, leading to release of DDC into the extracellular matrix and CSF. This explanation is supported by our observation of fewer dopaminergic neurons within DLB and PD(D) substantia nigra brain tissue compared with controls. DDC was also detected in tyrosine hydroxylase-negative cells. Tyrosine hydroxylase negativity can be observed when dopaminergic cell degeneration processes start and the cells initiate cytoprotective

Control

Fig. 5 | DDC immunohistochemical staining (DDC+) in postmortem substantia nigra tissue. a -w , DDC (gray) was detected in the nucleus, soma and processes of dopaminergic neurons (neuromelanin in brown) in control ( a and d ), PD(D) and DLB donors ( b , c , h and i ). In PD(D) and DLB donors, some neurons showed single or multiple DDC-positive LBs ( e -g ; arrowhead). Multi-labeling confirmed colocalization of DDC (green; i , m , q and u ) with phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn (red; j , n , r and v ) in pale bodies (arrow), LBs (arrowhead) and LNs in the substantia nigra. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue; k , o , s and w ). Overlay of DDC, phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn and DAPI is shown in h , l , p and t . Stainings were performed in postmortem brain tissue from neurologically healthy controls ( n = 4), patients with DLB ( n = 4) and patients with PD(D) ( n = 4; Extended Data Table 8). Representative stainings are shown for n = 1 control, n = 1 patient with PD and n = 3 patients with DLB. a -g , Brightfield microscopy images of single-DDC labeling. h -w , Fluorescence microscopy of multi-DDC/ phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn/DAPI labeling. a , d , Control, 20× and 60× magnification, respectively. b , e , PDD, 20× and 60× magnification, respectively. c , f , g , DLB, 20× and 60× magnification, respectively. h , l , p , t , Overlay of multi-DDC/ phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn/DAPI labeling in different regions. i , j , k , Isolated DDC ( i ), phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn ( j ) and DAPI ( k ) signal corresponding to the overlaid image in h . m , n , o , Isolated DDC ( m ), phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn ( n ) and DAPI ( o ) signal corresponding to the overlaid image in l . q , r , s , Isolated DDC ( q ), phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn ( r ) and DAPI ( s ) signal corresponding to the overlaid image in p . u , v , w , Isolated DDC ( u ), phosphorylated Ser129 α-syn ( v ) and DAPI ( w ) signal corresponding to the overlaid image in t . DAPI, 4′,6-diamidin2-phenylindol; PD(D), Parkinson's disease (dementia). Scale bars: 50 µm ( a -c , p -s ), 10 µm ( d -g , t -w ), 25 µm ( h -k ), 75 µm ( l -o ).

processes 38 . In addition to these findings in dopaminergic neurons, we also observed positive staining for DDC in serotonergic neurons of the raphe nuclei. Together, these findings suggest that measured CSF

DDC may reflect both dopaminergic and serotonergic dysfunction to some extent. However, the underlying reasons for elevated CSF DDC, as well as the extent to which α-syn pathology and impairment of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic and serotonergic pathway are interconnected and influence CSF DDC levels, remain to be elucidated.

Elevated CSF DDC levels were associated with clinical symptoms, such as the presence of parkinsonism and visual hallucinations in patients with DLB. While the molecular mechanism causing visual hallucinations is not yet understood, the observed associations are in line with our findings of higher CSF DDC in relation to LB pathology in the limbic and neocortical brain regions, which are involved in, for example, sensory processing, emotion and perception 39,40 . While parkinsonian symptoms are known to be directly caused by nigrostriatal dopaminergic dysfunction, the lack of association of DDC levels with continuous UPDRS-III scores tentatively suggests that CSF DDC levels may not be directly related to nigrostriatal dopaminergic degeneration. We did not observe consistent associations of DDC with cognitive impairment or AD CSF biomarkers, corroborating previous findings suggesting rather weak correlations between these clinical symptoms and biological disease severity 16-19 . Future studies should thoroughly assess how DDC associates with clinical disease parameters.

To allow for the implementation of biomarkers into clinical and research practice, quantification of absolute protein concentrations is essential, which is a common limitation of biomarker discovery technologies, including PEA. Nevertheless, using antibody-based discovery approaches, as applied for DDC, increased success rates and shortened the time to develop a biomarker assay ready for clinical implementation, as shown here and before 41-43 .

Our study has limitations. We cannot exclude misdiagnosis of DLB cases. However, clinical diagnoses were made by DLB experts according to consensus guidelines 7 , and in two cohorts confirmed by αS-SAA or neuropathology, and DDC findings were consistent across cohorts. Further, data availability for certain severity measures was limited. These results should hence be seen as a starting point for more extensive studies. Most patients in the YUHS DaT-PET presented with parkinsonian symptoms and multiple co-pathologies. In addition, the study lacked a control group of cognitively unimpaired individuals. As a result, we were unable to compare CSF DDC levels with DaT uptake in pathological versus healthy conditions. To advance clinical implementation, future studies should evaluate diagnostic performance in longitudinal and prospective cohorts, including different disease stages, as well as analyzing the association of CSF DDC with serotonergic dysfunction in different diseases.

In conclusion, our data show strong evidence for DDC as a biomarker to support the clinical diagnosis of DLB and PD: (1) we showed substantially elevated levels in DLB and PD versus controls or patients with AD, and we verified elevated CSF DDC in DLB and PD patients who were confirmed by ex vivo and postmortem gold standards; (2) we assured robustness of our quantitative immunoassays and consistency of measurements by analytical validation according to consensus guidelines 25 ; (3) we confirmed specificity of the detection antibody used in the immunoassays by immunostainings in human brain tissue and showed DDC upregulation in remaining dopaminergic neurons and colocalization with phosphorylated Ser129 with α-syn aggregation. Altogether, we propose CSF DDC as a biomarker to support the diagnosis of DLB and PD. Our robust immunoassays offer accessible tools to accurately quantify DDC, advancing possible future implementation of DDC.

## Online content

Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-026-04212-0.

## Table 1

| 0                                       | 1                      |     2 |    3 |    4 |    5 |    6 |
|:----------------------------------------|:-----------------------|------:|-----:|-----:|-----:|-----:|
| ADCDiscoveryCohort (CSF, Ella)          | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.966 | 0.94 | 0.93 | 0.93 | 0.94 |
| ADCDiscoveryCohort (CSF, Ella)          | DLBversusAD            | 0.939 | 0.9  | 0.88 | 0.88 | 0.9  |
| ADCDiscoveryCohort (CSF,Simoa)          | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.96  | 0.94 | 0.93 | 0.93 | 0.94 |
| ADCDiscoveryCohort (CSF,Simoa)          | DLBversusAD            | 0.945 | 0.88 | 0.9  | 0.86 | 0.92 |
| ADC/SPINValidationCohort (CSF, Ella)    | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.96  | 0.95 | 0.88 | 0.95 | 0.89 |
| ADC/SPINValidationCohort (CSF, Ella)    | DLBversus MCI-A+       | 0.782 | 0.89 | 0.64 | 0.86 | 0.71 |
| ADC/SPINValidationCohort (CSF, Ella)    | DLBversusAD            | 0.762 | 0.73 | 0.72 | 0.74 | 0.73 |
| DDBB/BMDBValidation Cohort(CSF,Simoa)   | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.937 | 0.88 | 0.83 | 0.89 | 0.82 |
| DDBB/BMDBValidation Cohort(CSF,Simoa)   | DLBversusAD            | 0.702 | 0.56 | 0.83 | 0.63 | 0.78 |
| DDBB/BMDBValidation Cohort(CSF,Simoa)   | PDversus CTRL          | 0.947 | 1    | 0.89 | 1    | 0.91 |
| DDBB/BMDBValidation Cohort(CSF,Simoa)   | PDversusAD             | 0.823 | 0.75 | 0.86 | 0.71 | 0.89 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLBversus CTRL      | 0.894 | 0.88 | 0.89 | 0.88 | 0.78 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLBversusAD         | 0.895 | 0.78 | 0.91 | 0.68 | 0.95 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLB(DN) versus CTRL | 0.867 | 0.82 | 0.78 | 0.76 | 0.84 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLB(DN) versusAD    | 0.872 | 0.74 | 0.92 | 0.53 | 0.96 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF,Simoa)           | PD+DLBversus CTRL      | 0.93  | 0.88 | 0.93 | 0.79 | 0.91 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF,Simoa)           | PD+DLBversusAD         | 0.917 | 0.84 | 0.88 | 0.79 | 0.91 |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF,Simoa)           | PD+DLB(DN) versus CTRL | 0.91  | 0.87 | 0.88 | 0.84 | 0.9  |
| UNIPGαS-SAACohort (CSF,Simoa)           | PD+DLB(DN) versusAD    | 0.897 | 0.84 | 0.85 | 0.69 | 0.93 |
| BIODEM/UAntwerpAutopsy Cohort(CSF,Ella) | DLBversus CTRL         | 0.998 | 0.97 | 1    | 0.95 | 1    |
| BIODEM/UAntwerpAutopsy Cohort(CSF,Ella) | DLBversusAD            | 0.872 | 0.9  | 0.78 | 0.82 | 0.87 |

## Table 2

| 0                                   | 1                     | 2                     | 3                     | 4                     | 5               |
|:------------------------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------|:----------------------|:----------------|
| n                                   | 50                    | 41                    | 51                    |                       |                 |
| Sex, Female (%)                     | 24 (48.0)             | 3 (7.3)               | 26 (52.0)             |                       | 2.92E-06        |
| Age, years (median [IQR])           | 61.0 [58.0, 64.0]     | 70.5 [64.5, 74.8]     | 68.0 [62.8, 72.0]     |                       | 1.90E-07        |
| MMSE (mean (SD))                    | 28.4 (1.2)            | 22.4 (4.1)            | 17.2 (5.2)            |                       | 2.28E-13        |
| A β 42, pg/mL (mean (SD)) a)        | 1159.5 (175.1)        | 817.1(239.8)          | 586.9 (103.2)         |                       | 1.42E-32        |
| pTau, pg/mL (mean (SD)) a)          | 39.2 (10.8)           | 51.8 (20.6)           | 100.7 (50.9)          |                       | 4.55E-16        |
| tTau, pg/mL (mean (SD)) a)          | 231.3 (79.3)          | 344.9 (143.5)         | 859.9 (462.2)         |                       | 4.10E-20        |
| DDC in CSF Ella, pg/mL (mean (SD))  | 39.47 (16.37)         | 84.66 (25.88)         | 45.37 (14.55)         |                       | 2.45E-22        |
| DDC in CSF Simoa, pg/mL (mean (SD)) | 18.19 (7.85)          | 35.98 (9.53)          | 21.40 (6.41)          |                       | 3.43E-20        |
| ADC/SPIN Valida ti on Cohort        | CTRL                  | DLB                   | MCI-A+                | AD                    | p               |
| n                                   | 108                   | 106                   | 101                   | 104                   |                 |
| Sex, Female (%)                     | 54 (50.0)             | 30 (28.3)             | 47 (46.5)             | 52 (50.0)             | 0.003           |
| Age, years (median [IQR])           | 59.00 [56.00, 64.00]  | 73.00 [69.00, 78.00]  | 70.00 [67.00, 73.00]  | 69.00 [63.00, 74.00]  | 4.05E-36        |
| MMSE (mean (SD))                    | 28.79 (1.20)          | 22.56 (4.16)          | 25.82 (2.59)          | 20.81 (3.73)          | 1.64E-60        |
| MoCA (mean (SD)) b)                 | 25.35 (2.18)          | 19.34 (4.19)          | 23.00 (2.83)          | 13.00 (NA)            | 8.00E-09        |
| A β 42 (ADC), pg/mL;                | ADC: 1670.71 (347.57) | ADC: 955.22 (456.89)  | ADC: 789.22 (225.58)  | ADC: 683.65 (180.35)  | ADC: 1.03e-39   |
| A β 42/40 (SPIN) (mean (SD)) c)     | SPIN: 0.1 (0.01)      | SPIN: 0.07 (0.03)     | SPIN: 0.04 (0.01)     | SPIN: 0.04 (0.01)     | SPIN: 8.37e-52  |
|                                     | ADC: 18.31 (8.18)     | ADC: 19.34 (9.95)     | ADC: 35.96 (14.87)    | ADC: 31.08 (18.93)    | ADC: 1.13e-11   |
| pTau, pg/mL (mean (SD)) c)          | SPIN: 38.36 (11.89)   | SPIN: 91.55 (70.65)   | SPIN: 117.24 (58)     | SPIN: 141.47 (75.95)  | SPIN: 3.945e-16 |
|                                     | ADC: 196.05 (74.28)   | ADC: 207.74 (83.07)   | ADC: 326.19 (139.64)  | ADC: 319.87 (186.44)  | ADC: 6.08e-09   |
| tTau, pg/mL (mean (SD)) c)          | SPIN: 262.09 (78.36)  | SPIN: 572.09 (423.74) | SPIN: 714.38 (338.22) | SPIN: 874.86 (414.83) | SPIN: 1.091e-16 |
| DDC in CSF Ella, pg/mL (mean (SD))  | 30.27 (7.97)          | 49.10 (18.81)         | 35.73 (11.10)         | 39.46 (20.89)         | 2.71E-16        |
| DDBB/BMDB Valida ti on Cohort       | CTRL                  | DLB                   | PD                    | AD                    | p               |
| n                                   | 42                    | 47                    | 37                    | 52                    |                 |
| Sex, Female (%)                     | 16 (38.1)             | 8 (17.0)              | 10 (27.0)             | 13 (25.0)             | 0.244           |
| Age, years (median [IQR])           | 65.50 [55.00, 72.00]  | 74.00 [68.00, 77.50]  | 69.00 [62.00, 76.00]  | 72.50 [66.00, 77.25]  | 0.003           |
| MMSE* (mean (SD))                   | 28.29 (2.72)          | 24.71 (3.69)          | 24.44 (4.65)          | 23.56 (4.89)          | 5.68E-04        |
| A β 42, pg/mL* (mean (SD)) a)       | 1143.54 (196.20)      | 756.78 (285.66)       | 785.23 (291.57)       | 487.52 (168.70)       | 1.96E-21        |
| pTau, pg/mL* (mean (SD)) a)         | 41.71 (9.71)          | 46.56 (22.29)         | 41.63 (24.76)         | 50.13 (38.34)         | 0.574           |
| tTau, pg/mL* (mean (SD)) a)         | 265.39 (66.72)        | 363.25 (192.94)       | 346.29 (292.52)       | 805.12 (221.11)       | 8.49E-24        |
| DDC in CSF Simoa, pg/mL (mean (SD)) | 20.93 (7.01)          | 41.16 (13.62)         | 53.36 (35.96)         | 32.91 (11.85)         | 2.48E-10        |

## Table 3

| 0                                         | 1                 | 2                 | 3                 | 4        |
|:------------------------------------------|:------------------|:------------------|:------------------|:---------|
| n                                         | 65                | 78                | 110               |          |
| Sex, Female (%)                           | 31 (47.7)         | 28 (35.9)         | 74 (67.3)         | 7.99E-05 |
| Age, years (median [IQR])                 | 70.0 [63.0, 75.0] | 66.0 [62.2, 71.8] | 73.0 [70.0, 76.0] | 3.88E-07 |
| MMSE/MoCA (mean (SD)) a)                  | 26.57 (2.99)      | 21.88(5.17)       | 21.01 (5.8)       | 3.07E-10 |
| A β 42/40 (mean (SD))b)                   | 0.11 (0.02)       | 0.10 (0.03)       | 0.05 (0.01)       | 2.57E-56 |
| pTau, pg/mL (mean (SD))b)                 | 36.26 (9.44)      | 41.81 (20.28)     | 114.63 (60.73)    | 8.23E-33 |
| tTau, pg/mL (mean (SD))b)                 | 265.43(140.74)    | 282.28 (178.8)    | 810.01 (393.85)   | 1.56E-34 |
| α S-SAA posi ti vity (%)                  | 0 (0.0)           | 78 (100.0)        | 56 (50.9)         | 9.06E-46 |
| DDC in CSF Ella, pg/mL (mean (SD)) c)     | 55.7 (19.1)       | 99.6 (29.4)       | 65.7 (25.8)       | 1.97E-17 |
| DDC in CSF Simoa, pg/mL (mean (SD)) d)    | 21.9 (8.3)        | 46.4 (21.3)       | 25.0 (8.5)        | 6.27E-25 |
| DDC in plasma Simoa, pg/mL (mean (SD)) e) | 2181.3 (1665.9)   | 2592.2 (1641.0)   | 1426.3 (552.7)    | 0.009    |
| BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy Cohort            | CTRL              | DLB               | AD                | p        |
| n                                         | 30                | 18                | 30                |          |
| Sex, Female (%)                           | 13 (43.3)         | 3 (16.7)          | 15 (50.0)         | 0.068    |
| Age, years (median [IQR])                 | 64.0 [61.2, 65.8] | 75.5 [71.0, 81.0] | 71.5 [64.0, 75.8] | 3.66E-06 |
| A β 42, pg/mL (mean (SD)) f)              | 1099.2 (201.9)    | 554.2 (256.3)     | 436.6 (206.6)     | 3.53E-17 |
| pTau, pg/mL (mean (SD)) f)                | 49.2 (15.4)       | 62.1 (37.5)       | 78.9 (48.5)       | 0.01     |
| tTau, pg/mL (mean (SD)) f)                | 231.9 (94.2)      | 507.7 (405.1)     | 587.0 (300.2)     | 1.06E-05 |
| DDC in CSF Ella, pg/mL (mean (SD))        | 32.71 (13.54)     | 73.01 (31.21)     | 41.46 (23.76)     | 2.68E-07 |

## Table 4

| 0                                   | 1                       | 2                       | 3                       |        4 |
|:------------------------------------|:------------------------|:------------------------|:------------------------|---------:|
| n                                   | 102                     | 24                      | 78                      |          |
| Age, years (median [IQR])           | 77.406 [70.026, 81.983] | 71.025 [63.815, 77.919] | 78.621 [73.099, 82.603] | 0.003    |
| Sex, Female (%)                     | 49 (48.0)               | 19 (79.2)               | 30 (38.5)               | 0.001    |
| MMSE (mean (SD))                    | 21.552 (4.969)          | 21.667 (5.615)          | 21.515 (4.792)          | 0.904    |
| A β 42, pg/mL (mean (SD))           | 544.294 (359.205)       | 600.750 (383.541)       | 526.923 (352.145)       | 0.381    |
| pTau, pg/mL (mean (SD))             | 15.099 (7.696)          | 14.248 (7.565)          | 15.362 (7.765)          | 0.538    |
| pTau/A β 42 ra ti o (mean (SD))     | 0.036 (0.026)           | 0.034 (0.027)           | 0.037 (0.027)           | 0.574    |
| DDC in CSF Simoa, pg/mL (mean (SD)) | 51.311 (30.928)         | 51.837 (21.463)         | 51.150 (33.421)         | 0.925    |
| α S-SAA abnormality, n(%)           | 48 (47.1)               | 10 (41.7)               | 38 (48.7)               | 0.642    |
| DaT PET abnormality, n (%)          | 78 (76.5)               | 0 (0.0)                 | 78 (100.0)              | 7.31e-24 |
| Presence of diagnosis a)            |                         |                         |                         |          |
| DLB, n (%)                          | 41 (40.2)               | 5 (20.8)                | 36 (46.2)               | 0.033    |
| AD, n (%)                           | 50 (49.0)               | 12 (50.0)               | 38 (48.7)               | 1        |
| pLBD, n (%)                         | 56 (54.9)               | 17 (70.8)               | 39 (50.0)               | 0.101    |
| NPH, n (%)                          | 55 (53.9)               | 8 (33.3)                | 47 (60.3)               | 0.034    |
| VCI, n (%)                          | 20 (19.6)               | 7 (29.2)                | 13 (16.7)               | 0.238    |
| PSP, n (%)                          | 3 (2.9)                 | 0 (0.0)                 | 3 (3.8)                 | 1        |
| svPPA, n (%)                        | 1 (1.0)                 | 1 (4.2)                 | 0 (0.0)                 | 0.235    |

## Table 5

| 0                                          | 1                         | 2                     |   3 |        4 |
|:-------------------------------------------|:--------------------------|:----------------------|----:|---------:|
| ADC Discovery Cohort (CSF, Ella)           | DLB vs CTRL               | 0.33 (0.24 to 0.43)   | 2.2 | 1.61e-14 |
|                                            | DLB vs AD                 | 0.27 (0.19 to 0.36)   | 1.9 | 1.8e-12  |
|                                            | DLB vs CTRL               | 0.31 (0.22 to 0.40)   | 2   | 1.65e-13 |
| ADC Discovery Cohort (CSF, Simoa)          | DLB vs AD                 | 0.23 (0.15 to 0.31)   | 1.7 | 1.51e-09 |
|                                            | DLB vs CTRL               | 0.14 (0.07 to 0.21)   | 1.6 | 9.89e-07 |
| ADC/SPIN Valida ti on Cohort (CSF, Ella)   | DLB vs MCI-A+             | 0.11 (0.06 to 0.16)   | 1.4 | 2.74e-06 |
|                                            | DLB vs AD                 | 0.08 (0.03 to 0.13)   | 1.2 | 0.001    |
|                                            | AD vs CTRL                | 0.06 (0.0005 to 0.12) | 1.3 | 0.048    |
|                                            | DLB vs CTRL               | 0.25(0.16 to 0.34)    | 2   | 1.65e-10 |
| DDBB/BMDB Valida ti on Cohort (CSF, Simoa) | DLB vs AD                 | 0.09 (0.01 to 0.18)   | 1.3 | 0.02     |
|                                            | PD vs CTRL                | 0.35 (0.26 to 0.44)   | 2.5 | 1.11e-16 |
|                                            | PD vs AD                  | 0.19 (0.10 to 0.29)   | 1.6 | 4.47e-07 |
|                                            | PD vs DLB                 | 0.10 (0.008 to 0.19)  | 1.3 | 0.026    |
|                                            | AD vs CTRL                | 0.16 (0.07 to 0.24)   | 1.6 | 6.6e-05  |
|                                            | PD+DLB vs CTRL            | 0.26 (0.19 to 0.33)   | 1.8 | 4.88e-15 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort (CSF, Ella)           | PD+DLB vs AD              | 0.19 (0.12 to 0.26)   | 1.5 | 2.36e-10 |
|                                            | AD vs CTRL                | 0.07 (0.005 to 0.13)  | 1.2 | 0.03     |
|                                            | PD+DLB (DN) vs CTRL       | 0.23 (0.14 to 0.33)   | 1.7 | 6.39e-10 |
|                                            | PD+DLB (DN) vs AD         | 0.16 (0.08 to 0.24)   | 1.5 | 2.32e-10 |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs CTRL        | 0.31 (0.20 to 0.43)   | 2   | 1.3e-11  |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs AD          | 0.24 (0.14 to0.35)    | 1.7 | 3.71e-08 |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs PD+DLB (DN) | 0.08 (-0.04 to 0.20)  | 1.2 | 0.32     |
|                                            | PD+DLB vs CTRL            | 0.31 (0.25 to 0.37)   | 2.1 | 0        |
|                                            | PD+DLB vs AD              | 0.24 (0.18 to 0.30)   | 1.9 | 0        |
|                                            | AD vs CTRL                | 0.07 (0.01 to 0.13)   | 1.1 | 0.014    |
|                                            | PD+DLB (DN) vs CTRL       | 0.27 (0.19 to 0.35)   | 1.9 | 0        |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort (CSF, Simoa)          | PD+DLB (DN) vs AD         | 0.20 (0.13 to 0.27)   | 1.6 | 6.46e-12 |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs CTRL        | 0.39 (0.29 to 0.48)   | 2.5 | 0        |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs AD          | 0.32 (0.23 to 0.40)   | 1.9 | 0        |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs PD+DLB (DN) | 0.12 (0.02 to 0.21)   | 1.4 | 0.00971  |
|                                            | PD+DLB vs CTRL            | 0.06 (-0.11 to 0.23)  | 1.2 | 0.663    |
|                                            | PD+DLB vs AD              | 0.17 (-0.001 to 0.34) | 1.8 | 0.052    |
|                                            | PD+DLB (DN) vs CTRL       | -0.02 (-0.22 to 0.18) | 0.9 | 0.998    |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort (Plasma, Simoa)       | PD+DLB (DN) vs AD         | 0.09 (-0.1 to 0.28)   | 1.1 | 0.618    |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs CTRL        | 0.21 (-0.02 to 0.43)  | 1.6 | 0.089    |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs AD          | 0.31 (0.10 to 0.52)   | 2.5 | 0.0011   |
|                                            | PD+DLB (T) vs PD+DLB (DN) | 0.22 (0.04 to 0.42)   | 1.8 | 0.011    |
| BIODEM/UAntwerp Autopsy Cohort (CSF, Ella) | DLB vs CTRL               | 0.31 (0.15 to 0.48)   | 2.2 | 6.06e-05 |
|                                            | DLB vs AD                 | 0.25 (0.10 to 0.39)   | 1.8 | 0.000333 |

## Table 6

| 0                             | 1                 |     2 |    3 |    4 |    5 |     6 |    7 |    8 |
|:------------------------------|:------------------|------:|-----:|-----:|-----:|------:|-----:|-----:|
| ADC Discovery                 | DLB vs HC         | 0.926 | 54.1 | 0.86 | 0.9  | 0.873 | 0.82 | 0.78 |
| ADC Discovery                 | DLB vs AD         | 0.904 | 60.4 | 0.86 | 0.83 | 0.769 | 0.51 | 0.98 |
| ADC Discovery                 | DLB vs HC         | 0.914 | 27.1 | 0.88 | 0.88 | 0.873 | 0.82 | 0.78 |
| ADC Discovery                 | DLB vs AD         | 0.899 | 27.7 | 0.84 | 0.88 | 0.769 | 0.51 | 0.98 |
| ADC/SPIN Valida ti on         | DLB vs HC         | 0.835 | 38.9 | 0.86 | 0.69 | 0.942 | 0.86 | 0.9  |
| ADC/SPIN Valida ti on         | DLB vs MCI-A+     | 0.733 | 40.7 | 0.79 | 0.66 | 0.682 | 0.9  | 0.37 |
| ADC/SPIN Valida ti on         | DLB vs AD         | 0.682 | 40.8 | 0.68 | 0.66 | 0.726 | 0.79 | 0.58 |
| DDBB/BMDB Valida ti on Cohort | DLB vs HC         | 0.927 | 31.1 | 0.95 | 0.72 | 0.725 | 0.74 | 0.64 |
| DDBB/BMDB Valida ti on Cohort | DLB vs AD         | 0.691 | 30.1 | 0.58 | 0.77 | 0.562 | 0.46 | 0.74 |
| DDBB/BMDB Valida ti on Cohort | PD vs HC          | 0.94  | 31.5 | 0.95 | 0.87 | 0.6   | 0.24 | 0.97 |
| DDBB/BMDB Valida ti on Cohort | PD vs AD          | 0.778 | 30.3 | 0.6  | 0.89 | 0.612 | 0.88 | 0.32 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA                 | PD+DLB vs HC      | 0.885 | 67.4 | 0.8  | 0.85 | 0.608 | 0.39 | 0.84 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA                 | PD+DLB vs AD      | 0.827 | 78.7 | 0.8  | 0.75 | 0.781 | 0.64 | 0.84 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA                 | PD+DLB (DN) vs HC | 0.854 | 67.4 | 0.8  | 0.81 | 0.59  | 0.39 | 0.86 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA                 | PD+DLB (DN) vs AD | 0.778 | 78.7 | 0.8  | 0.64 | 0.771 | 0.64 | 0.86 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA                 | PD+DLB (T) vs HC  | 0.945 | 84.5 | 0.92 | 0.95 | 0.643 | 0.24 | 1    |
| UNIPG α S-SAA                 | PD+DLB (T) vs AD  | 0.92  | 89.5 | 0.88 | 0.89 | 0.8   | 0.46 | 1    |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort          | PD+DLB vs HC      | 0.926 | 29.4 | 0.87 | 0.88 | 0.581 | 0.35 | 0.84 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort          | PD+DLB vs AD      | 0.886 | 29   | 0.72 | 0.89 | 0.781 | 0.59 | 0.85 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort          | PD+DLB (DN) vs HC | 0.909 | 26.8 | 0.82 | 0.9  | 0.575 | 0.35 | 0.85 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort          | PD+DLB (DN) vs AD | 0.852 | 29   | 0.72 | 0.85 | 0.774 | 0.59 | 0.85 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort          | PD+DLB (T) vs HC  | 0.957 | 34.5 | 0.93 | 0.93 | 0.591 | 0.38 | 0.81 |
| UNIPG α S-SAA Cohort          | PD+DLB (T) vs AD  | 0.946 | 35.5 | 0.88 | 0.93 | 0.794 | 0.72 | 0.74 |
| BIODEM/ UAntwerp Autopsy      | DLB vs HC         | 0.927 | 45.5 | 0.87 | 0.89 | 0.977 | 1    | 0.83 |
| BIODEM/ UAntwerp Autopsy      | DLB vs AD         | 0.844 | 47.3 | 1    | 1    | 0.745 | 0.73 | 0.72 |

## Table 7

| 0                                             | 1        | 2        |
|:----------------------------------------------|:---------|:---------|
| n                                             | 42       | 106      |
| Parkinsonism (n present/n not present/NA)     | 5-3-1934 | 70/11/25 |
| Fluctua ti ons (n present/n not present/NA)   | 4-4-1934 | 53/18/35 |
| Hallucina ti ons (n present/n not present/NA) | 5-4-1933 | 48/31/27 |
| RBD (n present/n not present/NA)              | 5-3-1934 | 42/32/32 |
| DaT scan (n abnormal/n normal/NA)             | 5-1-1936 | 38/10/58 |

## Table 8

| 0                          | 1              |     2 |     3 | 4             |     5 |     6 | 7              |      8 |      9 |
|:---------------------------|:---------------|------:|------:|:--------------|------:|------:|:---------------|-------:|-------:|
| All par ti cipants         | -0.315 (0.303) | 0.301 | 0.452 | 0.031 (0.330) | 0.926 | 0.926 | -0.097 (0.054) | 0.073  | 0.219  |
| Drug- naïve par ti cipants | -0.389 (0.413) | 0.35  | 0.443 | 0.329 (0.425) | 0.443 | 0.443 | -0.201 (0.060) | 0.0015 | 0.0045 |

## Table 9

| 0                                               | 1             | 2             | 3             |
|:------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:--------------|
| n                                               | 4             | 4             | 4             |
| Sex, F (%)                                      | 2 (50%)       | 1 (25%)       | 1 (25%)       |
| Age at death, years (median [IQR])              | 81 (8.2)      | 81 (5.2)      | 73.5 (4.7)    |
| Disease dura ti on, months or years (mean (SD)) | NA            | 3.5 (1.3)     | 19.75 (7.6)   |
| PMD, hh:mm (mean (SD))                          | 06:57 (00:29) | 04:36 (00:32) | 06:55 (01:03) |
| Braak NFT stage (0-6; range)                    | 1-3           | 1-3           | 1-2           |
| Braak α Syn stage (0-6; range)                  | 0             | 6             | 6             |
| Thal Phase (0-5; range)                         | 0-2           | 2-3           | 1-3           |