
## ORIGINAL ARTICLE

## Fecal microbiota from patients with Parkinson's disease intensifies inflammation and neurodegeneration in A53T mice

Huijia Yang 1 | Yaping Shao 1 | Yiying Hu 1,2 | Jin Qian 2 | Panpan Wang 1 | Lulu Tian 1 Yang Ni 1 | Song Li 1 | Murad Al-  Nusaif 1 | Cong Liu 3 | Weidong Le 1,4

1 Key Laboratory of Liaoning Province for Research on the Pathogenic Mechanisms of Neurological Diseases, The First Affiliated	Hospital,	Dalian	Medical University, Dalian, China

2 Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated	Hospital,	Dalian	Medical University, Dalian, China

3 Interdisciplinary Research Center on Biology and Chemistry, Shanghai Institute of	Organic	Chemistry,	Chinese	Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China

4 Shanghai University of Medicine and Health	Sciences	Affiliated	Zhoupu Hospital,	Shanghai,	China

## Correspondence

Weidong Le, Key Laboratory of Liaoning Province for Research on the Pathogenic Mechanisms of Neurological Diseases, The First	Affiliated	Hospital,	Dalian	Medical University, Dalian 116021, China.

Email: wdle@sibs.ac.cn

## Funding information

Shanghai Municipal Central Government Funds for Guiding Local Scientific and Technological Development, Grant/ Award	Number:	YDZX20213100001002; National Nature Science Foundation of	China,	Grant/Award	Number: 32220103006 and 82271524

## 1 | INTRODUCTION

Parkinson's  disease  (PD)  is  the  second  most  prevalent  neurodegenerative  disorder. 1 Globally,  the  incidence  of  PD  is  on  the

## Abstract

Aims: We evaluated the potential of Parkinson's disease (PD) fecal microbiota transplantation to initiate or exacerbate PD pathologies and investigated the underlying mechanisms.

Methods: We transplanted the fecal microbiota from PD patients into mice by oral gavage and assessed the motor and intestinal functions, as well as the inflammatory and	pathological	changes	in	the	colon	and	brain.	Furthermore,	16S	rRNA	gene	se -quencing combined with metabolomics analysis was conducted to assess the impacts of fecal delivery on the fecal microbiota and metabolism in recipient mice.

Results: The fecal microbiota from PD patients increased intestinal inflammation, deteriorated intestinal barrier function, intensified microglia and astrocyte activation, abnormal deposition of α -  Synuclein, and dopaminergic neuronal loss in the brains of A53T	mice.	A	mechanistic	study	revealed	that	the	fecal	microbiota	of	PD	patients stimulated the TLR4/NFκ B/NLRP3	pathway	in	both	the	brain	and	colon.	Additionally, multiomics analysis found that transplantation of fecal microbiota from PD patients not only altered the composition of the gut microbiota but also influenced the fecal metabolic profile of the recipient mice.

Conclusion: The fecal microbiota from PD patients intensifies inflammation and neurodegeneration	in	A53T	mice.	Our	findings	demonstrate	that	imbalance	and	dysfunc -tion in the gut microbiome play significant roles in the development and advancement of PD.

## KEYWORDS

dopaminergic neurodegeneration, fecal microbiota transplantation, inflammation, metabolomics, Parkinson's disease rise  due  to  the  aging  population. 2 PD  is  characterized  by  motor symptoms,  including  resting  tremor,  rigidity,  bradykinesia,  and gait/postural  instability,  as  well  as  nonmotor  manifestations. 3 Gastrointestinal (GI) dysfunctions are among the most prevalent

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative	Commons	Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

©	2024	The	Author(s). CNS Neuroscience &amp; Therapeutics published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

nonmotor  symptoms  that  occur  in  the  initial  phases  and  even in  the  pre-  motor  stage  of  PD,  affecting  around  80%  of  patients with PD. 4,5 In  particular, constipation prevails in individuals with PD and may manifest years or even decades prior to the onset of motor symptoms associated with PD. 6,7

Accumulation	of α -  Synuclein ( α -  syn) and progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) are the main pathological hallmarks of PD. 8 Studies by Braak et al. 9,10 have delineated  the  early  involvement  of  the  enteric  nervous  system (ENS), showcasing α -  syn pathology within the GI tract during the incipient stages of PD. Our previous study found that stereotaxic injection of colonic tissue from PD patients into the striatum of rats resulted in dopaminergic neurodegeneration and α -  syn deposition. 11 The  ENS  and  central  nervous  system  (CNS)  have  bidirectional  communication,  and  the  gut  microbiota  plays  a  crucial role in facilitating the connection between the gut and the brain. Furthermore, recent reports showed that patients with neurodegenerative diseases have altered gut microbiota. 12,13 The gut microbiota is increasingly recognized to play a critical role in several neurodegenerative diseases. 12 Multiple pathogenetic mechanisms by  which  the  gut  microbiota  communicates  with  the  CNS  have been	suggested.	Alterations	in	the	gut	microbiota	can	affect	the immune system, vagus nerve, ENS, neuroendocrine system, and circulatory system, all of which may have a profound impact on neurodegeneration. 14,15

Multiple  studies  have  demonstrated  that  patients  with  PD exhibit  alterations  in  their  gut  microbiota. 16,17 One  or  more  alterations in particular bacteria may be connected with PD symptoms or  pathology.  There  was  a  correlation  between  the  abundance  of Enterobacteriaceae and the severity of postural instability and gait impairment. 18 Probiotics  are  live  bacteria  that,  when  consumed in sufficient  quantities,  help  restore  the  balance  of  the  gut  microbiota, improve the integrity of the intestinal barrier, and modulate the immune system for the benefit of the host. 19 The  use  of  probiotics  was  effective  in  alleviating  constipation  symptoms in individuals with PD. 20 Given that GI dysfunction, such as constipation and dysbiosis of the gut microbiota, may play a role in the pathological progression of PD, the utilization of probiotics may alleviate complications. 21 Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a medical procedure transferring the fecal matter from healthy donors into the GI tract of patients. 21 The purpose of FMT is to treat certain diseases by restoring a balanced and stable population of microorganisms in the gut. 22 Several clinical trials have shown that FMT can effectively alleviate symptoms in PD patients. 23,24

Furthermore,  the  gut  microbiota  processes  a  variety  of  substances,  yielding  diverse  metabolites,  including  short-  chain  fatty acids	 (SCFAs),	 hormones,	 neurotransmitters,	 and	 others.	 These metabolites  exert  profound  influences  on  neural  transmission,  inflammatory  response,  neuroprotection,  and  cellular  apoptosis, 25 displaying  a  strong  correlation  with  the  progression  of  PD.  Our present study aimed to ascertain whether gut microbiomes sourced from PD patients can modulate disease outcomes upon the transfer into α -	 syn	A53T	transgenic	(TG)	mice	of	PD	and	their	age-	 matched

wild-  type (WT) littermates. In addition, we performed 16S ribosomal RNA	(rRNA)	gene	sequencing	and	untargeted	metabolomic	analysis using liquid chromatography-  mass spectrometry (LC-MS) to excavate the mechanisms underlying the effects of the microbiota.

## 2 | METHODS

## 2.1 | Study design

In order to investigate the potential impacts of PD gut microbiota transplantation on the gut and brain function of recipients, we orally fed	fecal	microbiota	from	healthy	controls	(HCs, n = 4)	 or	 patients with PD ( n = 4)	into	A53T	and	WT	mice	by	gavage	(100 μ L per mouse, once	daily,	4 weeks).	The	experimental	design	was	schematically	il -lustrated in Figure S1. First of all, we examined the motor functions of	A53T	and	WT	mice	at	three	ages:	3-	 ,	9-	 ,	and	18-	 month-	 old.	We found	that	A53T	mice	did	not	develop	motor	dysfunction	at	9 months (Figure S2), consistent with the previous study. 26 Because our study aimed to investigate the potential impact of gut microbiota on disease	development,	we	chose	the	presymptomatic	mice	at	7 months of age ( n = 8-10)	to	start	the	experiments.	The	A53T	and	WT	mice were randomized into four groups: WT mice treated with feces from HC	(WT\_HC)	or	from	PD	(WT\_PD),	and	TG	mice	treated	with	feces from	HC	(TG\_HC)	or	from	PD	(TG\_PD).	After	4 weeks	of	treatment, the impacts of FMT from PD patients on behavior, intestinal motility, barrier function, inflammation, and the microbiota and metabolomic profiles of the mice were assessed and analyzed.

The methods are detailed in File S1.

## 3 | RESULTS

## 3.1 | FMT from PD patients induces motor impairments, emotional disturbance, and intestinal dysfunctions in recipient mice

Behavioral  assessments  were  performed  as  shown  in  the  timeline (Figure 1A ). Motor dysfunction, as the pathological consequence of dopaminergic neuronal loss, is a major symptom in PD patients. In our present study, the rotarod-  test was used to determine whether FMT from PD patients affects the motor function of recipient mice. We found that the latency to fall off the rod was significantly decreased in	 the	 TG\_PD	 mice	 compared	 with	 the	 TG\_HC	 mice	 ( Figure  1B). Consistently, in the open-  field test (OFT), ambulatory distance and mean	velocity	were	significantly	decreased	in	the	TG\_PD	group	com -pared	with	the	TG\_HC	group	( Figure 1C,D). The results align with previous research, 27 demonstrating compromised motor performance in TG mice that received FMT from patients with PD.

Besides motor deficits, PD patients usually show psychiatric disorders, including anxiety and depression. In the present study, the OFT and tail-  suspension test (TST) were used to assess the mental status	of	mice.	Compared	with	the	TG\_HC	mice,	the	TG\_PD	mice

(A)

7M A53T or WT mice

(B)

Latency Time,

Center of Ambulatory Distance, %

FIGURE 1 FMT	from	PD	patients	induces	motor	impairment	and	emotional	alteration	in	recipient	mice.	(A)	Microbiota	transfer	timeline overview, (B-G) Behavioral tests including Rotarod-  Test (B), Open-  Field Test (C-F) and Tail-  Suspension Test (G). n = 8-10	per	group. p &lt; 0.05 was	set	as	the	threshold	for	significance	by	two-	 way	ANOVA	followed	by	post	hoc	comparisons	using	Sidak's	test	for	multiple	groups' comparisons, * p &lt; 0.05,	** p &lt; 0.01.

showed a decrease in central distance traveled and a significant increase in stereotype counts (Figure 1E,F ).	Additionally,	we	observed that	the	TG\_PD	mice	displayed	severer	immobility	than	the	TG\_HC mice during the TST (Figure 1G). These findings indicated that FMT from  PD  patients  may  cause  or  aggravate  motor  and  nonmotor impairments.

In  addition,  the  GI  dysfunctions  of  the  recipient  mice  were also assessed. Their fecal pellets were collected to measure water content, which indirectly represents colonic motility. Mice that received FMT from PD patients exhibited significantly reduced fecal wet  weight  and  fecal  water  content  compared  with  control  mice (Figure S3A,B ).  No  significant  differences  were  observed  in  24-  h food intake among all groups, excluding interference of food intake on fecal traits (Figure S3C). In addition, we measured the whole gut transit time (WGTT), which is the amount of time it takes for an edible dye to pass through the GI tract and be eliminated, to examine GI function. Mice that received the FMT from PD patients had a longer	WGTT	than	mice	that	received	the	FMT	from	HCs	( Figure S3D). Throughout the study, no significant  change  was  observed  in  the body weight of the mice (Figure S3E).

Fecal collection

## 3.2 | FMT from PD patients induces inflammation, exacerbates pathological features, and compromises the intestinal barrier in the colon of recipient mice

To further investigate the molecular interactions between gut microbial dysbiosis and gut inflammation in PD, we determined colon levels  of  tumor  necrosis  factorα (TNFα ),  interleukin-  1 β (IL-  1 β ), interleukin-  6  (IL-  6),  and  inducible  nitric  oxide  synthase  (iNOS)  by quantitative  real-  time  polymerase  chain  reaction  (qRT-  PCR)  and western blot. The result of qRT-  PCR showed higher levels of iNOS, IL-  1 β , IL-  6, and TNFα in the colon of the TG mice that received FMT from	PD	patients	compared	with	those	received	HCs	( Figure 2A-D ). Consistent results were obtained in western blot (Figure 2E,e), indicating intestinal inflammation through increased enteric glial reactivity in the myenteric plexuses. 28 Our results also showed that markers of enteric glial cells, including glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)	and	S100 β ,  were significantly increased (Figure S4). To assess whether intestinal inflammation could aggravate PD pathologies,  we  performed  immunofluorescence  staining  and  found  that the levels of α -  syn and phosphorylatedα -  syn (pα -  syn, S129) were significantly elevated in the colon of mice that received FMT from PD	compared	with	those	received	HCs	( Figure 2F,G). No significant difference was observed regarding the expression level of α -  syn in dopaminergic and cholinergic neurons (Figure S5).

The gut microbiota plays a crucial role in regulating and maintaining the integrity of the intestinal barrier. 29 Alterations	in	the	compo -sition of the intestinal microbiota may compromise the integrity of the gut barrier, thereby contributing to the development of various diseases.	 Key	 tight	 junction	 proteins,	 such	 as	 Zonula	 occludens-	 1 (ZO-	 1)	and	Occludin,	are	pivotal	in	maintaining	gut	permeability.	In our	study,	the	levels	of	these	proteins	and	mRNAs	were	determined by  western  blot,  qRT-  PCR,  and  immunofluorescence  staining  to evaluate the effect of the FMT from PD patients on the intestinal barrier function in recipient mice. QRT-  PCR showed the tight junctions were disrupted in the colon (Figure 3A-C ). Meanwhile, western blot  analysis  of  the  colon  confirmed  the  decreased  levels  of  tight junction  proteins  in  the  mice  that  received  the  FMT  from  PD  patients (Figure 3D,d ).	 Consistently,	fluorescence	intensities	of	ZO-	 1 and Occludin were decreased in the colon of mice that received the FMT from PD patients (Figure 3E,F), indicating disrupted tight junction integrity.

## 3.3 | FMT from PD patients increases circulating inflammation cytokines and disrupts the blood-brain barrier in recipient mice

The gut microbiota, along with activated immune cells, generates an array of inflammatory mediators that can breach the compromised intestinal barrier and stimulate the production of inflammatory cytokines  by  other  immune  cells  within  the  systemic  circulation. 30 Peripherally derived inflammatory factors can exert a direct impact

on the brain by increasing the permeability of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). 31 Therefore, it is necessary to examine systemic inflammatory factors to understand the impact of gut microbiota derived from PD patients on inflammatory alterations in the mouse brain. In this study, we obtained peripheral blood samples from mice via orbital bleeding and determined the levels of cytokines by enzymelinked	immunosorbent	assay	(ELISA).	Our	data	revealed	a	substantial elevation  of  proinflammatory  cytokines,  including  IL-  1 β ,  IL-  6,  and TNFα ,  in  the  plasma  of  mice  administered  fecal  samples  sourced from individuals with PD (Figure S6). To investigate the effects of feces from PD on the integrity of the BBB, we analyzed the tight junction	proteins,	Occludin	and	ZO-	 1.	Western	blot	analysis	of	the midbrain found that levels of tight junction proteins were decreased in mice after receiving the FMT from PD patients (Figure S7A ). We also assessed the BBB marker CD-  31, an important adhesion protein of intercellular junctions in endothelial cells 32 by immunofluorescence staining. The results showed that CD-  31 expression was down-  regulated in the cortex of mice after receiving the FMT from PD patients, indicating that the BBB was disturbed (Figure S7B).

## 3.4 | FMT from PD patients induces neuroinflammation and aggravates pathological features in the SN of recipient mice

To further explore how PD fecal samples aggravated motor deficits, we detected histological characteristics and neuroinflammation in the SN. Immunofluorescence staining signified a reduced number of tyrosine	hydroxylase	(TH)-	 positive	neurons	and	an	elevated	number of	GFAP	and	Iba-	 1-	 positive	cells	in	the	SN	of	the	mice	that	received FMT from PD patients (Figure 4). Subsequently, we found that alterations in the gut microbiota, induced by FMT from individuals with PD, aggravated the pathological accumulation of α -  syn and pα -  syn (S129) within the SN and the colocalization of α -  syn  or  pα -  syn  in TH-	 positive	neurons	( Figure 5). These results suggest the possibility that exposure to the PD-  derived gut microbiota may increase neuroinflammation and exacerbate α -  syn pathology within the brain.

## 3.5 | FMT from PD patients activates the TLR4/NFκ B/NLRP3 signaling pathway in both the colon and SN of recipient mice

The gut microbiota holds potential for modulating the ENS via Tolllike receptors (TLRs) and their microbe-  associated molecular pattern ligands. Previous studies have demonstrated the significance of TLR4 signaling in regulating GI motility. 33,34 FMT from PD patients may elevate the levels of downstream inflammatory factors by activating the TLR4/NFκ B/NLRP3 signaling pathway. These reports suggest that	the	TLR4/NF-	 ĸB/NLRP3	pathway	plays	a	crucial	role	in	mediat -ing PD, intestinal flora, and inflammation. 35 Indeed, we observed the activation of the TLR4/NFκ B pathways in the colon and SN of the mice that received FMT from PD patients (Figure 6). Moreover, the

Relative iNOS gene expression

(E)

iNOS

IL-1B

TNF-a.

IL-6

B-actin

(e1)

Relative iNOS protein level

WT\_HC

(e3)

Relative IL-6 protein level

FIGURE 2 FMT	from	PD	patients	induces	inflammation	and	aggravates	pathological	features	in	the	colon	in	recipient	mice.	(A-D)	The mRNA	expression	of	iNOS	(A),	IL-	 1 β (B), IL-  6 (C), and TNFα (D) in the colon, n = 6-8	per	group.	(E)	Representative	western	blot	brands of iNOS, IL-  1 β , TNFα , and IL-  6 in the colon. (e) The relative quantitative results of iNOS (e1), IL-  1 β (e2), IL-  6 (e3), and TNFα (e4) in the colon, n = 4-6	per	group.	(F,	G)	Representative	confocal	images	of α -  syn (F) and Pα -  syn (S129, G) immunofluorescence in the colon tissue, the images in the leftmost column were acquired by 10 × object	lens,	scale	bar:	400 μ m;	the	images	in	the	right	3 columns	were	acquired transversely by 60 × object	lens,	scale	bar:	25 μ m. p &lt; 0.05	was	set	as	the	threshold	for	significance	by	two-	 way	ANOVA	followed	by	post	hoc comparisons using Sidak's test for multiple groups' comparisons, * p &lt; 0.05,	** p &lt; 0.01,	*** p &lt; 0.001.

(B

Relative IL-1ß gene expression

(C)

Relative IL-6 gene expression

(D)

Relative TNF-a gene expression

ZO-1

Occludin

ZO-1/DAPI(10x)

FIGURE 3 FMT	from	PD	patients	causes	intestinal	barrier	damage	in	recipient	mice.	(A-C)	The	mRNA	expression	of	Tjp	(A),	Occludin	(B), Claudin2 (C) in the colon, n = 8	per	group.	(D)	Representative	western	blot	brands	of	ZO-	 1	and	Occludin	in	the	colon.	(d)	Relative	quantitative results	of	ZO-	 1	(d1)	and	Occludin	(d2)	in	the	colon, n = 4	per	group.	(E,	F)	Representative	confocal	images	of	ZO-	 1	(E)	and	Occludin	(F) immunofluorescence of colon tissue; the images in the leftmost column were acquired by 10 × object	lens,	scale	bar:	400 μ m; the images in the	right	3 columns	were	acquired	transversely	by	60 × object	lens,	scale	bar:	25 μ m.	Data	are	presented	as	mean ± SEM. p &lt; 0.05	was	set	as the	threshold	for	significance	by	two-	 way	ANOVA	followed	by	post	hoc	comparisons	using	Sidak's	test	for	multiple	groups'	comparisons, * p &lt; 0.05,	** p &lt; 0.01,	*** p &lt; 0.001.

mice that received FMT from PD patients showed elevated levels of caspase-  1 and mature IL-  1 β ,	TLR2,	NLRP3,	and	Apoptosis-	 associated Speck-	 like	protein	containing	a	CARD	(ASC)	protein	in	the	colon	and

SN (Figure 7). These findings suggest that FMT from PD patients may facilitate PD pathologies and disease progression by potentiating the TLR4/NFκ B/NLRP3 pathway.

WT\_PD

TG\_HC

TG\_PD

A)

\_HC

WT

WT PD

\_PD

TG

TH/GFAP (10x)

TH (60x)

Merge (60x)

(a1)

GFAP (60x)

FIGURE 4 FMT	from	PD	patients	induces	neuroinflammation	in	the	SN	of	recipient	mice.	(A,	B)	Representative	confocal	images	of	TH (A,	B),	GFAP	(A)	and	Iba-	 1	(B)	immunofluorescence	in	the	SN;	the	images	in	the	leftmost	column	were	acquired	by	10 × object	lens,	scale	bar: 200 μ m;	the	images	in	the	right	3 columns	were	acquired	by	60 × object	lens,	scale	bar:	25 μ m.	(a,	b)	Numbers	of	TH	cells	(a1),	GFAP	cells	(a2) and Iba-  1 cells (b) in the SN, n = 4	per	group.	Data	are	presented	as	mean ± SEM. p &lt; 0.05	was	set	as	the	threshold	for	significance	by	two-	 way ANOVA	followed	by	post	hoc	comparisons	using	Sidak's	test	for	multiple	groups'	comparisons,	* p &lt; 0.05,	** p &lt; 0.01.

WT HC

TG HC

TG PD

TH/p-a-syn (10x)

a-syn (60x)

TLR4

IKKBR

IKKa

P65

p-P65

(B) Substantia nigra

IKKB

p-IkBa

WT\_HC WT\_PD

(a3)

FIGURE 5 FMT	from	PD	patients	aggravates	pathological	features	in	the	SN	of	recipient	mice.	(A)	Representative	capture	of α -  syn immunofluorescence in the SN. (B) Representative captures of pα -  syn (S129) immunofluorescence in the SN; the images in the leftmost column were acquired by 10 × object	lens,	scale	bar:	200 μ m;	the	images	in	the	right	3 columns	were	acquired	by	60 × object	lens,	scale	bar: 25 μ m. 0.5 0.5

85kDa

FIGURE 6 FMT	from	PD	patients	activates	the	NFκ B	pathway	in	both	the	colon	and	SN	in	recipient	mice.	(A)	The	representative	western blot brands of TLR4, IKK β , IKK α , P65, p-  P65, I κ B α , and p-  I κ B α in the colon. (a) Density analysis of TLR4 (a1), IKK β (a2), IKK α (a3), p-  P65/P65 (a4), and p-  I κ B α /I κ B α (a5) in the colon, n = 4-6	per	group.	(B)	The	representative	western	blot	brands	of	TLR4,	IKK β , IKK α , P65, p-  P65, I κ B α , and p-  I κ B α in the SN. (b) Density analysis of TLR4 (b1), IKK β (b2), IKK α (b3), p-  P65/P65 (b4), and p-  I κ B α /I κ B α (b5) in the SN, n = 4	per	group. Data	are	presented	as	mean ± SEM. p &lt; 0.05	was	set	as	the	threshold	for	significance	by	two-	 way	ANOVA	followed	by	post	hoc	comparisons using Sidak's test for multiple groups' comparisons, * p &lt; 0.05,	** p &lt; 0.01,	*** p &lt; 0.001.

## 3.6 | FMT from PD patients alters gut microbiota composition in recipient mice

Because our current study found that the fecal microbiota of PD patients activated the inflammatory reaction in the colon, we further investigated the composition of the gut microbiota in mice that received	different	treatments	using	16S	rRNA	gene	sequencing.

The α -	 diversity	 of	 the	 gut	 microbiota,	 including	 ace	 and	 Chao 1 index,  was  markedly  decreased  in  the  mice  that  received  the FMT  from  PD  patients  compared  with  the  mice  that  received HCs	( Figure 8A,B ).  This  result  is  consistent  with  the  decreased α -  diversity of the gut microbiota in PD patients (Figure S8). The β -	 diversity,	 including	 principal	 coordinate	 analysis	 (PCoA),	 non -metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS), and analysis of similarity

(a2)

(A) Colon

NLRP3

TLR2

c-caspasel

ASC

IL-18

m-IL-1B

m-IL-1ß

FIGURE 7 FMT	from	PD	patients	activates	the	NLRP3	inflammasome	in	both	the	colon	and	SN	in	recipient	mice.	(A)	The	representative western	blot	brands	NLRP3,	TLR2,	c-	 caspase1,	ASC,	IL18	and	m-	 IL1 β in the colon. (a) Density analysis of NLRP3 (a1), TLR2 (a2), c-  caspase1 (a3),	ASC	(a4),	IL18	(a5)	and	m-	 IL1 β (a6) in the colon, n = 4-6	per	group.	(B)	The	representative	western	blot	brands	of	NLRP3,	TLR2,	ccaspase1,	ASC,	IL18	and	m-	 IL1 β in	the	SN.	(b)	Density	analysis	of	NLRP3	(b1),	TLR2	(b2),	c-	 caspase1	(b3),	ASC	(b4),	IL18	(b5)	and	m-	 IL1 β (b6) in the SN, n = 4	per	group.	Data	are	presented	as	mean ± SEM. p &lt; 0.05	was	set	as	the	threshold	for	significance	by	two-	 way	ANOVA	followed by post hoc comparisons using Sidak's test for multiple groups' comparisons, * p &lt; 0.05,	** p &lt; 0.01,	*** p &lt; 0.001.

(ANOSIM),	showed	an	obvious	distinction	in	the	gut	microbiota structure between recipient mice that received fecal microbiota from different sources (Figure 8C-E). In addition, the heat map showed the differential bacteria at the genus level among mice with different treatments (Figure 8F ).	 We	further	selected	12 genera and displayed their details using box plots (Figure 8G-R ).	A	lower relative  abundance  of Lachnospiraceae\_UGG-  006 , Howardella , f\_ Flavobacteriaceae\_Unclassified , f\_Christensenellaceae\_Unclassified , Holdemanella ,  and Anaerofustis (Figure 8G-L) as well as a higher relative abundance of Alloprevotella , f\_Prevotellaceae\_Unclassified ,

FIGURE 8 FMT	from	PD	patients	alters	gut	microbiota	composition	in	recipient	mice.	(A,	B) α -	 diversity:	Comparison	of	ace	index	(A)	and chao1	index	(B)	based	on	ASV	levels	in	different	groups.	(C,	D)	PCoA	(C)	and	NMDS	(D)	of β -	 diversity	based	on	the	ASV	level,	where	each point	represents	a	single	sample	colored	by	group	circle.	(E)	Analysis	of β diversity	of	gut	microbiota	by	ANOSIM	analysis	in	different	groups. (F)	Heatmap	about	relative	abundances	of	gut	microbiota	at	the	genus	level	in	different	groups.	(G-R)	Bacterial	genera	were	differentially observed in the four groups. n = 5-7	per	group.	Data	were	presented	as	medians	with	an	interquartile	range	and	analyzed	by	the	KruskalWallis test, * p &lt; 0.05,	** p &lt; 0.01,	*** p &lt; 0.001.

ANOSIM R = 0.495, P = 0.001

Weighted Unifrac ramk

(G)

Lachnospiraceae\_UCG-006

Relative abandance

(K)

abandance tive

Ace Index

Erysipelatoclostridium

R2=0.201, F=1.766, P=0.001

Stress = 0.249

F = 1.766, P-value = 0.001

Erysipelatoclostridium , Flavonifractor , Subdoligranulum , and [Ruminococcus]\_gnavus at the gene level were found in the mice that received FMT from PD patients (Figure 8M-R). Furthermore, Spearman  correlation  analysis  was  performed  to  identify  the association  between  different  key  genera  and  inflammatory and  barrier-  related  indicators  in  the  colon  (Figure  S9).  Our  results  showed  that  some  genera  enriched  in  the  mice  that  received FMT from PD patients, including Subdoligranulum , Erysipelatoclostridium , [ Ruminococcus ] \_gnavus , Alloprevotella , f\_ Prevotellaceae\_Unclassified ,  and Flavonifractor ,  were  significantly correlated with inflammatory and barrier-  related indicators in the colon.  The  correlation  coefficients  for  other  genera  that  were reduced in the mice that received FMT from PD patients, such as Holdemanella , Howardella , f\_Flavobacteriaceae\_Unclassified , Christensenellaceae\_R-  7\_group , Anaerofustis , Lachnospiraceae\_ UGG-  006 ,  and f\_Christensenellaceae\_Unclassified ,  were  the  opposite.  These  findings  indicate  substantial  alterations  in  the composition and function of the gut microbiota in mice following FMT from  PD  patients,  highlighting  the  pivotal  role  of  gut  microbes in PD-  related inflammatory responses.

## 3.7 | FMT from PD patients alters the levels of fecal metabolites in recipient mice

Given that the host's metabolic pathways are constantly regulated by the gut microbiota, the fecal metabolome is thought to be a functional readout of the gut microbiome. We used untargeted metabolomics to determine alterations in fecal metabolites. Quality control  (QC)  samples  were  analyzed  through  person-  correction analysis to ensure that the metabolomic data are reliable and accurate. The QC samples showed a strong correlation, indicating good reproducibility (Figure S10A).	Additionally,	the	PLS-	 DA	score	plots showed that the QC samples clustered closely together, providing additional evidence of trustworthy data quality (Figure S10B). OPLS-	 DA	showed	a	significant	separation	of	samples	among	the different  groups.  Furthermore,  mice  that  were  given  FMT  from patients  with  PD  exhibited  a  higher  degree  of  variation  in  their metabolomic profile compared to mice who were given FMT from HCs	( Figure 9A ). The differentiated metabolites with a p -  value less than 0.05 were visually portrayed using distinct colors in volcano plots, based on the results of the univariate analysis (Figure 9B,C). As	shown	in	the	heat	map,	metabolites	such	as	uric	acid	were	re -duced in TG mice that received FMT from PD patients, while metabolites such as ferulate were reduced in WT mice that received FMT from PD patients (Figure 9D,E). In order to investigate the relationship between fecal microbiome and fecal metabolome, the Spearman's correlation coefficient between differential fecal metabolome and differential bacterial genera was presented as a heat map (Figure S11 ).	 A	 total	 of	 152	 statistically	 significant	 associa -tions between microbiota and fecal metabolites were identified, reaching  a  significant  difference  of p &lt; 0.05.	 In	 conclusion,	 FMT from PD patients altered the structure and composition of the gut

microbiota and significantly altered fecal metabolism in recipient mice.

## 4 | DISCUSSION

PD is accompanied by changes in the intestinal microbial community. 36-38 Our  present  findings  may  provide  additional  evidence that alterations in the gut microbiota are associated with PD. We document  the  decreased α -  diversity  and  altered  gut  microbiota composition  in  mice  that  received  microbiota  from  PD  patients. This result is consistent with the previous studies in PD patients 39 and  PD  animal  models. 40 β -  diversity  analysis  revealed  a  distinct separation  between  the  microbiota  of  mice  that  received  FMT from	PD	patients	and	HCs.	In	recipient	mice	FMT	from	PD	patients, we  identify  certain  genus-  level  bacteria: Erysipelatoclostridium 41 and Ruminococcus gnavus , 42 which are associated with colon disease	 and	 inflammatory	 bowel	 disease.	 However,	 the	 abundance of other probiotics decreased in the feces of recipient mice that received FMT from PD patients. The abundance of Holdemanella , Howardella , Lachnospiraceae\_ucg-  006 ,  and Anaerofustis was  positively	 correlated	 with	 SCFAs, 43 which  may  play  a  role  in  maintaining barrier integrity and intestinal homeostasis. 44 It  has  been shown that the content of Holdemanella was lower in the constipated PD group. 45

In  our  study,  we  demonstrated  that  dysregulated  gut  microbiota induces intestinal inflammation, which is attributed to the NFκ B  and  NLRP3  pathways.  NFκ B  is  a  crucial  nuclear  transcription factor that can control the transcription level of genes associated with  inflammation.  External  stimuli,  such  as  lipopolysaccharide, trigger the activation of NFκ B and cause its redistribution into the nucleus. This process stimulates the synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines. 46 In addition, recent findings suggest that NLRP3 is also involved in maintaining intestinal homeostasis and regulating the gut microbiota. 47 The colonic mucosa is a prominent location for NLRP3 activation and has been linked to intestinal homeostasis regulation. Its  heightened  expression  can  facilitate  the  caspase-  1-  mediated inflammatory  cascade,  subsequently  triggering  the  expression  of downstream inflammatory factors, including IL-  1 β , IL-  6, and TNFα . NFκ B activation not only directly promotes the expression of inflammatory  cytokines  such  as  pro-  IL-  1 β ,  TNFα ,  and  IL-  6  but  also mediates the transcription of NLRP3. 48 In  this  study, we observed higher levels of inflammatory factors in the colon of mice that received  PD  patients'  microbiota  compared  to  those  of  mice  that received	HCs,	which	might	be	induced	by	NFκ B and NLRP3 inflammasome activation. In addition to the severe inflammatory reactions in the gut, we detected breakdown of the colonic epithelial barrier, including	a	considerable	decrease	in	ZO-	 1	and	Occludin	in	the	colon. We have further analyzed the correlation between the indicators of intestinal inflammation, the intestinal barrier, and the key bacterial genera. Their strong correlation confirmed that the dysregulated gut microbiota may aggravate intestinal inflammation and contribute to intestinal barrier damage.

-log10 (P-value)

· Down regulated(6)

FIGURE 9 FMT	from	PD	patients	alters	the	fecal	metabolite	levels	in	recipient	mice.	(A)	OPLS- 	 DA	score	plot	of	the	metabolome	in fecal	of	different	groups	of	mice.	(B,	C)	Volcano	plot	of	the	differential	fecal	metabolites	in	WT\_PD	(B)	and	TG\_PD	(C)	filtered	by	univariate analysis.	(D,	E)	Heat	maps	of	the	differential	metabolites	between	different	mice	in	fecal. n = 7-9	per	group.

Braak et al. proposed a hypothesis suggesting the potential prionlike spread of α -  syn from the ENS to the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve and subsequently to other regions of the CNS. 9 This hypothesis has been validated in several animal models. 49 In addition to the vagus nerve, other pathways may exist for bidirectional communication between the gut and brain. Systemic inflammation caused by intestinal inflammation and intestinal barrier damage perturbs the BBB and is essential for  gut-  brain  communication. 50 In  our  study,

OPLS-DA

· WT\_HC

we observed elevated levels of circulating inflammatory factors in mice  that  received  FMT  from  PD  patients.  NFκ B  and  NLRP3  inflammasome  are  activated,  which  may  further  activate  microglia and astrocytes in the brain. Overactivated microglia and astrocytes are  believed  to  play  an  important  role  in  neuroinflammation  and dopaminergic  neurodegeneration  in  the  pathogenesis  of  PD. 51 In addition, we found that α -  syn and pα -  syn, neuropathological hallmarks of PD, were abnormally deposited in the SN of the mice that received FMT from PD patients. We believe that the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome and NFκ B might lead to the buildup of α -  syn. 52 Conversely, α -  syn produced by damaged dopaminergic neurons triggers the activation of NFκ B and NLRP3 inflammasome, 53,54 establishing a positive feedback loop that exacerbates PD pathology. The relationship between gut microbiota and PD inflammation continues to be a focus of research. In PD model mice, gut microbiota dysregulation and secreted proinflammatory factors activate systemic  inflammatory  responses,  leading  to  increased  neuroinflammation. 55 Our  finding  provides  further  insights  into  this  phenomenon,  demonstrating  how  dysregulated  gut  microbiota  in  PD patients releases proinflammatory molecules, disrupts the gut barrier, and activates circulating inflammation, ultimately exacerbating neuroinflammation. Importantly, we have observed that the levels of  inflammation and α -  syn  were  significantly  elevated  in  the  mice after	receiving	FMT	from	PD	compared	with	HCs.	However,	we	have observed dopaminergic neuronal damage only in TG mice but not in WT mice. One explanation is that overexpressing α -  syn in TG mice may influence the development of PD pathology, whereas the WT mice may need more time to develop PD pathology.

The influence of the gut microbiota extends beyond the intestine as  it  interacts  with  the  host  to  generate  active  metabolites  transported through the circulatory system, impacting various bodily functions.  Our study reveals a significant difference in fecal metabolite composition between recipient mice that received FMT from different	sources.	An	inadequate	amount	of	beneficial	microbes	and	their metabolites could trigger an inflammatory reaction. 56 In the present study,	 we	 found	 that	 succinic	 acid	 and	 homocysteine	 (Hcy)	 are	 in -creased,	while	folic	acid,	ferulic	acid,	and	5-	 hydroxyindole	(5-	 HI)	are decreased in the feces of WT mice that received FMT from PD patients. Succinic acid is a metabolic intermediate of the tricarboxylic acid	(TCA)	cycle	that	builds	up	in	intestinal	inflammation	and	disrup -tion of the microbiota. 57 Hcy	is	an	important	metabolite	in	methionine metabolism.	Folic	acid	biosynthesis	in	the	gut	may	also	affect	Hcy	lev -els. 58 Increased	Hcy	and	succinic	acid	contributed	to	the	development of PD and disease severity. 59-61 Hcy	can	trigger	the	activation	of	nu -clear factor NFκ B in the brains of mice, leading to a rise in the release of IL-  1 β , TNFα , and other inflammatory factors, thus intensifying the inflammatory response in the brain tissue. 62 Ferulic acid is found in foods,  beverages,  supplements,  and  herbs,  and  its  absorption  rate depends on gut microbiota composition and activity. 63 On the other hand, ferulic acid can regulate the composition and metabolism of the gut microbiota, significantly enhance the intestinal barrier, and reduce intestinal  inflammation. 64 5-	 HI,	 an	 intestinal	 microbial	 transforma -tion product of dietary supplements, promotes intestinal peristalsis

through its  action  on  L-  type  calcium  channels. 65 We  have  also  observed	a	decreased	level	of	ursodeoxycholic	acid	(UDCA)	in	the	feces of	TG	mice	that	received	FMT	from	PD	patients.	UDCA	can	not	only inhibit the phosphorylation of NFκ B and reduce the production of inflammatory cytokines but also maintain the integrity of the intestinal barrier by enhancing the expression of tight junction proteins. 66 Spearman's correlation analysis in our study has shown that dominant genera are correlated with differential metabolites.

We acknowledge several limitations in our study. First, the complexity of microbiota interactions may not be fully captured in this study. Second, although we have confirmed alterations in the fecal microbiota among different groups, we have not conducted a comprehensive  investigation  into  the  specific  bacteria  or  metabolites closely	 related	 to	 PD.	 Also,	 the	 therapeutic	 potential	 of	 targeting these bacteria or metabolites remains to be determined. Third, due to the incomplete replication of the complexities of the human microbiome and pathobiology in animal models, the clinical translation of animal microbiome-  based research remains challenging. The existence of these limitations emphasizes the necessity for continued research efforts to unravel the complexities of the microbiota-  gutbrain axis and fully harness their potential.

## 5 | CONCLUSION

We	transplanted	fecal	microbiota	from	HCs	or	PD	patients	into	a mouse model of microbiota to evaluate the critical role of gut microbiota  in  the  pathophysiology  of  PD.  Our  work  demonstrates that FMT from PD donors to recipient mice results in not only gut homeostasis alteration but also motor behavioral and pathological characteristics of PD. The additional multiomics experiments in vivo may document a profound and complex disruption of the gut-  brain axis  and  identify  microorganisms  and  metabolites  possibly  associated with PD.

Overall, FMT from PD patients altered the structure and composition  of  the  gut  microbiota  in  recipient  mice  and  significantly changed  the  metabolic  profiles,  which  collectively  may  aggravate intestinal and systemic inflammation and eventually lead to dopaminergic neurodegeneration. Our findings suggest that imbalance, BBB damage, and dysfunction in the gut microbiome may play significant roles in the development and advancement of PD. Improving the  gut  microbiota  with  probiotics,  prebiotics,  and  FMT  may  help slow down neurodegeneration by restoring the integrity of the gut barrier and reducing inflammation.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

HY:	 conducted	 experimental	 work,	 performed	 data	 analysis,	 and wrote	 the	 original	 draft;	 YS:	 coconducted	 experimental	 work	 and performed	 bioinformatics	 analysis	 for	 metabonomics;	 YH:	 helped conduct experimental work and edited and revised the manuscript; JQ: conducted clinical study and collected fecal samples from PD patients;	 PW,	LT,	 and	 YN:	 helped	 conduct	experimental	work;	SL, NM, and CL: edited manuscript; WL: project supervision, initiating

research	concept,	and	manuscript	editing	and	revision.	All	authors agreed to be accountable for the content of the work.

## FUNDING INFORMATION

This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  fundings  from  Shanghai Municipal  Central  Government  Funds  for  Guiding  Local  Scientific and	Technological	Development	(YDZX20213100001002),	and	the National  Nature  Science  Foundation  of  China  (32220103006  and 82271524).

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE

All	participants	provided	written	informed	consent.

## ORCID

[Weidong Le https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7459-2705](https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7459-2705)