## B R I E F R E P O R T

## Gut Microbial Metabolites and Future Risk of Parkinson ' s Disease: A Metabolome-Wide Association Study

Department of Neurology, University Hospital Donostia, San Sebastian, Spain 19 BioDonostia Health Research Institute, Neurodegenerative Diseases Area, San Sebasti  an, Spain 20 Ageing Epidemiology Research Unit (AGE), School of Public Health, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom 21 Institute of Epidemiology and Social Medicine, University of Münster, Münster, Germany 22 University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

Yujia Zhao, MSc, 1 Yunjia Lai, PhD, 2 Sirwan K.L. Darweesh, MD, PhD, 3 Bastiaan R. Bloem, MD, PhD, 3 Lars Forsgren, MD, PhD, 4 Johnni Hansen, PhD, 5 Verena A. Katzke, PhD, 6 Giovanna Masala, MD, 7 Sabina Sieri, PhD, 8 Carlotta Sacerdote, MD, 9 Salvatore Panico, PhD, 10 Raul Zamora-Ros, PhD, 11 Maria-Jose S  anchez, MD, PhD, 12,13,14 José María Huerta, PhD, 14,15 Marcela Guevara, MD, PhD, 14,16,17 Ana Vinagre-Aragon, MD, 18,19 Paolo Vineis, PhD, 20 Christina M. Lill, PhD, 20,21 Gary W. Miller, PhD, 2 Susan Peters, PhD, 1 and Roel Vermeulen, PhD 1,22 *

1 Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands 2 Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York City, USA 3 Radboud University Medical Center; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior; Department of Neurology, Center of Expertise for Parkinson and Movement Disorders, Nijmegen, The Netherlands 4 Department of Clinical Science, Neurosciences, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden 5 Danish Cancer Institute, Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark 6 Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 7 Institute for Cancer Research, Prevention and Clinical Network (ISPRO), Florence, Italy 8 Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori di Milano, Milan, Italy 9 Unit of Cancer Epidemiology, Città della Salute e della Scienza University-Hospital, Turin, Italy 10 School of Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy 11 Unit of Nutrition and Cancer, Cancer Epidemiology Research Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain 12 Escuela Andaluza de Salud Pública (EASP), Granada, Spain 13 Instituto de Investigaci  on Biosanitaria ibs.GRANADA, Granada, Spain 14 Centro de Investigaci  on Biomédica en Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain 15 Department of Epidemiology, Murcia Regional Health Council-IMIB, Murcia, Spain 16 Instituto de Salud Pública y Laboral de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain 17 Navarra Institute for Health Research (IdiSNA), Pamplona, Spain 18 Movement Disorders Unit,

ABSTRACT: Background : Alterations in gut microbiota are observed in Parkinson ' s disease (PD). Previous studies on microbiota-derived metabolites in PD were small-scale and post-diagnosis, raising concerns about reverse causality.

Objectives : Our goal was to prospectively investigate the association between plasma microbial metabolites and PD risk within a metabolomics framework.

Methods : A nested case -control study within the prospective EPIC4PD cohort, measured prediagnostic plasma microbial metabolites using untargeted metabolomics.

Results : Thirteen microbial metabolites were identi fi ed nominally associated with PD risk ( P -value &lt; 0.05), including amino acids, bile acid, indoles, and hydroxy acid, although none remained signi fi cant after multiple testing correction. Three pathways were implicated in PD risk: valine, leucine, and isoleucine degradation, butanoate metabolism, and propanoate metabolism. PDassociated microbial pathways were more pronounced in men, smokers, and overweight/obese individuals.

Conclusion : Changes in microbial metabolites may represent a pre-diagnostic feature of PD. We observed biologically plausible associations between microbial pathways and PD, potentially in fl uenced by individual characteristics. © 2024 The Author(s). Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

Key Words: gut-brain axis; microbial metabolites; Parkinson ' s disease; pre-diagnostic biosamples; untargeted metabolomics

## This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative

Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modi fi cations or adaptations are made.

* Correspondence to: Dr. R. Vermeulen, Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Nieuw Gildestein, room 3.53, Yalelaan 2, 3584 CM, Utrecht, the Netherlands. E-mail: r.c.h.vermeulen@uu.nl

Yujia Zhao and Yunjia Lai Joint fi rst authors.

Relevant con fl icts of interest/ fi nancial disclosures : The authors declare no con fl icts of interest for this article. Funding agencies : This work was supported by Stichting ParkinsonFonds. Y.Z. received support from the China Scholarship

Council during the PhD period at Utrecht University-Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences. S.K.L.D. has received funding from the Parkinson ' s Foundation (PF-FBS-2026), ZonMW (09150162010183), ParkinsonNL (P2022-07 and P2021-14), The Michael J. Fox Foundation (MJFF-022767), and Edmond J Safra Foundation. C.M.L. was supported by the Heiseberg programme of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; LI 2654/4-1) and by The Michael J. Fox Foundation (MJFF-008994).

Received: 28 May 2024; Revised: 10 October 2024; Accepted: 21 October 2024

Published online 12 November 2024 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/mds.30054

The gut-brain hypothesis has gained interest for Parkinson ' s disease (PD) pathogenesis, with evidence indicating altered gut microbiota composition in PD cases. 1 Microbiota-derived metabolites, released into the bloodstream, have emerged as promising biomarkers re fl ecting gut microbiota functionality. 2 These microbial metabolites fall into three categories: (1) metabolites directly produced by gut microbiota from diets, like short-chain fatty acids and indole derivatives; (2) metabolites initially produced by the host and subsequently modi fi ed by microbiota, such as secondary bile acids; and (3) metabolites synthesized de novo by microbiota, like polysaccharide A. 3

Previous studies have reported changes in short-chain fatty acids and secondary bile acids in PD patients compared to controls. 4,5 However, the issue of reverse causality persists, as biosamples were collected postdiagnosis. Dietary changes because of pre-clinical PD symptoms like dysphagia, hyposmia, and constipation, as well as anti-PD medications like levodopa and catecholO -methyltransferase inhibitors, could also in fl uence gut microbiota and their metabolites. 5,6

This study used the EPIC4PD cohort, a populationbased prospective cohort where plasma samples were collected before PD diagnosis. 7 A prior study within this cohort showed that plasma lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP), a biomarker of bacterial invasion and intestinal permeability, is associated with an elevated risk of PD, indicating the potential involvement of gut microbiota in early disease development. 8 We aim to conduct a metabolome-wide association study (MWAS) within this cohort, focusing on plasma microbial metabolites, to further explore the gut-brain interplay in PD.

## Methods

## Study Design

We conducted a nested case -control study within the EPIC4PD cohort (total subject number: 220,494) across seven European countries. Cohort and PD case ascertainment details have been reported previously. 7,8 Of the 734 con fi rmed incident PD cases, 351 were eligible for inclusion based on the availability of baseline plasma samples. Controls were selected from the same cohort using incidence density sampling, matching by age at recruitment, sex, and study center with cases (1:1 ratio). Diet intake and lifestyle factors were collected at enrollment. 9

## Untargeted Metabolomics and Microbial Metabolite Annotation

Plasma samples were retrieved from the EPIC centralized biobank and analyzed at Columbia University, United States. The untargeted metabolome was measured by liquid chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometry (LC-HRMS) in two complementary modes, namely hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization (ESI + ) and reverse-phase chromatography-ESI -, referred to as ' HILIC-ESI + ' and ' C18-ESI   ' , respectively. After quality control procedures, batch effect corrections, and missing imputation, 7487 features for HILIC-ESI + and 6968 for C18-ESI   were retained for analysis.

Microbial metabolites within the metabolome were annotated using an internal spectral library and the Exposome-Explorer database. 3 In total, 167 features (78 HILIC-ESI + and 89 C18-ESI   features) were identifi ed as microbial metabolites, mainly categorized into amino acids and peptides (n = 42), fatty acyls (n = 20), carbohydrates and conjugates (n = 10), indoles and derivatives (n = 10), and phenylpropanoids and polyketides (n = 10) (Supplementary Table S1). Details on analytical methods and annotation are provided in Supplementary Data S1, Text S1.

## Statistical Analysis

Conditional logistic regression was applied for the matched case -control sets, estimating odds ratios (ORs), and 95% con fi dence intervals (CIs) for each metabolite (log2-transformed and scaled by standard deviation). Models included smoking status and body mass index (BMI) as covariates. The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied to account for false positives from multiple testing, and metabolites were considered signi fi cant at a false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 20%.

Strati fi ed analyses were performed by sex, smoking status (smokers or non-smokers at baseline), BMI (normal weight &lt;25 kg/m 2 , overweight/obese ≥ 25 kg/m 2 ), and plasma LBP concentrations (lower or higher than median, 25.6 μ g/mL) to assess potential effect modi fi cation. Sensitivity analyses included: (1) limiting PD cases to those diagnosed after 8 years since recruitment (n = 170) to address possible reverse causality; (2) restricting to PD cases with higher diagnostic validity (n = 188, labeled as ' de fi nite ' and ' very likely ' 7 ); and (3) adjusting for individual food categories (fruit, vegetables, meat, cereal, dairy, and fi sh/seafood) at baseline to account for dietary impact on gut microbiota.

An MWAS was performed on the entire metabolome (7487 HILIC-ESI + and 6968 C18-ESI   features) to enable pathway enrichment analysis. Metabolites with a raw P -value &lt;0.05 were chosen for pathway enrichment analysis using MetaboAnalystR 5.0 (Xia lab, Canada). 10 The mass tolerance, analytical mode, and permutation number were set as  5 ppm, mixed ( ' positive ' for HILIC-ESI + and ' negative ' for C18-ESI   ), and 1000, respectively. Enriched metabolic pathways were identi fi ed using a γ threshold ( P -value derived from the permutation tests for the pathway) of 0.05 and required the presence of at least three metabolites associated with PD risk. This study presents enriched

pathways related to gut microbiota. The selection criteria for determining pathways associated with the microbiota were knowledge-driven, based on extensive literature searches, particularly using the ExposomeExplorer database. For instance, the butanoate metabolism pathway is chosen because of the database ' s documented evidence of butyric acid.

## Results

PDpatients had a median period of 8 years (ranging from 0.2 -18 years) between recruitment and diagnosis (Supplementary Table S2). In the MWAS of annotated microbial metabolites, 13 metabolites were nominally associated with PD risk (raw P -value &lt;0.05), but none met the FDR 20% threshold (Table 1). Most metabolites, including arginylglutamate, creatinine, leucylproline, phenylalanine, Δ -aminovaleric acid, xylose, indole3-propionic acid, purine, gallic acid, L-2-hydroxyglutarate, and 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid, were found in higher abundance in PD cases compared with controls. In contrast, dihydroresveratrol and taurocholic acid were lower in PDcases.

0.76 -1.08). Chenodeoxycholic and taurocholic acid, primary bile acids, exhibited altered abundance with ORs of 1.13 (95% CI: 0.97 -1.31) and 0.81 (95% CI: 0.67 -0.96), respectively. Secondary bile acids, like lithocholic acid, glycodeoxycholic acid, and 3-oxodeoxycholic acid, did not show signi fi cant differences between cases and controls (Supplementary Table S1).

In the whole metabolome MWAS, 1000 metabolic features (547 HILIC-ESI + and 453 C18-ESI   features) showed nominal associations with PD risk (raw P -value &lt;0.05), but none met the FDR 20% threshold (Supplementary Fig. S1). Three pathways related to microbiota activity were enriched: valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation; butanoate metabolism; and propanoate metabolism (Fig. 1). Interestingly, these microbial pathways were heterogeneous across subgroups. More pathways were seen for individuals who were male, overweight/obese, and smokers. Only amino acid pathways were associated with PD among individuals with lower LBP levels, whereas short-chain fatty acids pathways were further enriched among those with higher LBP levels.

Short-chain fatty acids and bile acids are well-studied microbial metabolites. Butyric acid exhibited a lower, albeit non-signi fi cant, abundance in PD cases (OR: 0.91, 95% CI:

Sensitivity analyses, which limited PD cases to those with higher diagnostic certainty and those diagnosed more than 8 years because recruitment, showed consistent effect estimates with the main analyses (Supplementary Fig. S2). Additional adjustments for food intake also yielded similar results (Supplementary Fig. S3).

TABLE 1 Microbial metabolites associated with Parkinson ' s disease risk (raw P -value &lt;0.05)

| Metabolite                  | Evidence on microbial origin a   | Analytical method   |     m/z |   Retention time (s) | OR (95% CI) b      |   P -value |
| Arginylglutamate            | In vivo                          | C18-ESI              | 302.155 |                 32.2 | 1.22 (1.03 - 1.45) |      0.02  |
| Creatinine                  | In vivo                          | HILIC-ESI +         | 114.066 |                 33.6 | 1.22 (1.01 - 1.48) |      0.035 |
| Leucylproline               | In vivo                          | HILIC-ESI +         | 229.155 |                 50   | 1.27 (1.03 - 1.55) |      0.022 |
| Phenylalanine               | Both                             | C18-ESI              | 164.072 |                 34.3 | 1.19 (1.01 - 1.41) |      0.037 |
| Δ -Aminovaleric acid        | Both                             | C18-ESI              | 116.072 |                 30.4 | 1.18 (1.00 - 1.40) |      0.049 |
| Xylose                      | In vivo                          | C18-ESI              | 149.046 |                 37.3 | 1.25 (1.05 - 1.49) |      0.011 |
| Indolepropionic acid        | Both                             | HILIC-ESI +         | 190.086 |                 34.2 | 1.22 (1.05 - 1.43) |      0.011 |
| Dihydroresveratrol          | In vitro                         | C18-ESI              | 229.081 |                 73.6 | 0.84 (0.70 - 1.00) |      0.047 |
| Purine                      | In vitro                         | C18-ESI              | 119.035 |                 34.7 | 1.24 (1.03 - 1.48) |      0.02  |
| Gallic acid                 | Both                             | C18-ESI              | 169.013 |                 38.8 | 1.22 (1.03 - 1.46) |      0.024 |
| Taurocholic acid            | In vivo                          | HILIC-ESI +         | 516.306 |                 35.5 | 0.81 (0.67 - 0.96) |      0.016 |
| L-2-hydroxyglutarate        | In vitro                         | C18-ESI              | 147.03  |                 29.2 | 1.40 (1.05 - 1.85) |      0.02  |
| 4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid | In vivo                          | HILIC-ESI +         | 181.053 |                 41   | 1.30 (1.11 - 1.52) |      0.001 |

a De fi ned in the Exposome-Explorer database. ' Both ' indicated that the speci fi c metabolite simultaneously met in vitro (production by gut bacteria) and in vivo (reduction of concentrations by antibiotics or in germ-free animals) evidence supporting a microbial origin. ' in vivo/in vitro ' represented that evidence was limited to either in vivo or in vitro studies.

b Conditional logistic regression for the matched case -control sets, adjusted by smoking status and BMI. OR was calculated per SD increase of log2 ion intensity. Abbreviations: m/z , mass-to-charge ratio; OR, odds ratio; CI, con fi dence interval; BMI, body mass index; SD, standard deviation.

Alanine and aspartate Metabolism -

Aspartate and asparagine metabolism -

Glycine, serine, alanine and threonine metabolism -

FIG. 1. Microbiota-relevant pathways associated with Parkinson ' s disease (PD) in the main analyses and strati fi ed analyses. Pathways enriched with PD-associated metabolic features were identi fi ed using MetaboAnalyst 5.0. The position of the dot on the x -axis corresponds to the   log10 P -value calculated for the pathway, and the size of the dot corresponds to the number of features meeting P -value &lt;0.05 in the pathway. [Color fi gure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

## Discussion

Our study is the fi rst prospective investigation into the role of pre-diagnostic microbial metabolites in PD risk. We identi fi ed 13 metabolites and three microbial pathways nominally associated with PD. Notably, individual characteristics might in fl uence the variability in the involvement of gut microbiota in PD.

Previous studies have indicated increased blood levels of both short-chain fatty acids and secondary bile acids in PD patients compared with healthy controls (Supplementary Table S3). 4-11 However, our study found minimal changes in these metabolites. These discrepancies may stem from differences in the timing of metabolite assessment, with previous studies examining post-diagnostic samples versus our pre-diagnostic samples. Despite this, we observed alterations at the pathway level in short-chain fatty acid metabolism associated with PD, highlighting the need for further exploration of short-chain fatty acids and secondary bile acids within the gut-brain axis.

Our study provides novel evidence that certain microbial metabolites may contribute to PD development. For example, phenylalanine and L-2-hydroxyglutarate, recognized for their neurotoxic effects, 12,13 were associated with increased PD risk, whereas dihydroresveratrol, known for its neuroprotective properties, 14 showed an inverse association with PD. Interestingly, indole-3-propionic acid, despite its anti-in fl ammatory and antioxidant properties, 15 displayed a positive relationship with PD risk.

We noted differences in metabolite pro fi les and pathway enrichment related to sex, smoking status, and BMI. Similarly, our previous study on another microbiotarelated marker, LBP, revealed sexand BMI-speci fi c effects. 8 These fi ndings suggest personal characteristics may modify the relationship between microbial dysbiosis and PD. Previous research suggests smoking and obesity can induce gut microbiota dysbiosis, increase intestinal permeability, and contribute to gut in fl ammation. 16,17 Sex-related differences may be attributed to sex hormones affecting microbiota composition. 18 Additionally, individuals with higher LBP levels exhibited more microbiotarelevant pathways than those with lower LBP levels. Elevated LBP levels have been proposed as a biomarker for intestinal permeability, 19 suggesting intestinal leakage and increased microbial metabolites in the blood.

We acknowledged some limitations in this study. First, the extended prodromal phases of PD could introduce residual reverse causality. Early prodromal symptoms of PD, such as chronic constipation and loss of taste and smell, may occur up to 10 years before the onset of motor symptoms 20 and could in fl uence gut microbiota. Sensitivity analyses using an 8-year prediagnosis cutoff were consistent with our main fi ndings. Additionally, extended analysis regressing time-to-diagnosis (ranging from &lt;1 -18 years) to the 13 metabolites associated with PD showed no effect of time-to-diagnosis on metabolites abundance (Supplementary Fig. S4), suggesting a limited in fl uence of the prodromal stage. Second, many microbial metabolites are co-metabolized by the host and microbiota, making it dif fi cult to distinguish the contributions from microbiota without a more direct measurement of gut microbiota. Third, a one-time measurement may not fully capture the dynamic changes of microbial metabolism. High heterogeneity of microbiota among individuals might limit the power to detect signi fi cant changes, even with a large sample size. Fourth, our fi ndings of the nominally

All subjects

Men

Women

Smokers

Non-smokers

BMI&lt;25

BMI≥25

LBP&lt;median

LBPzmedian

associated 13 metabolites and three microbial pathways need further external validation. The effect estimates varied across the four national sub-cohorts involved, but were generally directionally consistent (Supplementary Table S4). Replication in external PD groups is necessary for full validation.

In summary, our study identi fi ed several metabolites nominally associated pre-diagnostically with PD incidence. These metabolites were linked to biological pathways, including valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation, butanoate metabolism, and propanoate metabolism. This is the fi rst large-scale prospective study examining gut microbial metabolites in pre-clinical PD. Our results warrant further investigation into the role of gut microbiota in PD development.

Acknowledgments: This work was supported by Stichting ParkinsonFonds. Y.Z. received support from the China Scholarship Council during the PhD period at Utrecht University-Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences. S.K.L.D. has received funding from the Parkinson ' s Foundation (PFFBS-2026), ZonMW (09150162010183), ParkinsonNL (P2022-07 and P2021-14), The Michael J. Fox Foundation (MJFF-022767), and Edmond J Safra Foundation. C.M.L. was supported by the Heiseberg programme of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; LI 2654/4-1) and by The Michael J. Fox Foundation (MJFF-008994). The coordination of EPIC is fi nancially supported by International Agency for Research on Cancer and also by the Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Imperial College London, which has additional infrastructure support provided by the National Institute for Health and Care Research Imperial Biomedical Research Centre (BRC). We are grateful to all the participants who have been part of the project. We acknowledge Dr. Miles Trupp from the Department of Clinical Science, Neurosciences, Umeå University, for his review of the manuscript, particularly for the interpretation on microbial metabolite functions. The national cohorts are supported by: Danish Cancer Society (Denmark); Ligue Contre le Cancer, Institut Gustave Roussy, Mutuelle Générale de l ' Education Nationale, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (France); German Cancer Aid, German Cancer Research Center, German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke, Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Germany); Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro-AIRC-Italy, Compagnia di SanPaolo and National Research Council (Italy); Dutch Ministry of Public Health, Welfare and Sports, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Netherlands Cancer Registry, LK Research Funds, Dutch Prevention Funds, Dutch ZON (Zorg Onderzoek Nederland), World Cancer Research Fund, Statistics Netherlands (The Netherlands); Health Research Fund (FIS) -Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Regional Governments of Andalucía, Asturias, Basque Country, Murcia and Navarra, the Catalan Institute of Oncology -ICO, CERCA Program/Generalitat de Catalunya for the institutional support to IDIBELL (Spain); Swedish Cancer Society, Swedish Research Council and County Councils of Skåne and Västerbotten (Sweden); Cancer Research UK (C864/A14136 to EPIC-Norfolk; C8221/A29017 to EPICOxford), Medical Research Council (MR/N003284/1, MC-UU\_12015/1, and MC\_UU\_00006/1 to EPIC-Norfolk; MR/M012190/1 to EPIC-Oxford), University of Cambridge (UK).

## Data Availability Statement

Research data are not shared.

## Table 1

| 0                           | 1        | 2           |       3 |    4 | 5                  |     6 |
|:----------------------------|:---------|:------------|--------:|-----:|:-------------------|------:|
| Arginylglutamate            | In vivo  | C18-ESI      | 302.155 | 32.2 | 1.22 (1.03 - 1.45) | 0.02  |
| Creatinine                  | In vivo  | HILIC-ESI + | 114.066 | 33.6 | 1.22 (1.01 - 1.48) | 0.035 |
| Leucylproline               | In vivo  | HILIC-ESI + | 229.155 | 50   | 1.27 (1.03 - 1.55) | 0.022 |
| Phenylalanine               | Both     | C18-ESI      | 164.072 | 34.3 | 1.19 (1.01 - 1.41) | 0.037 |
| Δ -Aminovaleric acid        | Both     | C18-ESI      | 116.072 | 30.4 | 1.18 (1.00 - 1.40) | 0.049 |
| Xylose                      | In vivo  | C18-ESI      | 149.046 | 37.3 | 1.25 (1.05 - 1.49) | 0.011 |
| Indolepropionic acid        | Both     | HILIC-ESI + | 190.086 | 34.2 | 1.22 (1.05 - 1.43) | 0.011 |
| Dihydroresveratrol          | In vitro | C18-ESI      | 229.081 | 73.6 | 0.84 (0.70 - 1.00) | 0.047 |
| Purine                      | In vitro | C18-ESI      | 119.035 | 34.7 | 1.24 (1.03 - 1.48) | 0.02  |
| Gallic acid                 | Both     | C18-ESI      | 169.013 | 38.8 | 1.22 (1.03 - 1.46) | 0.024 |
| Taurocholic acid            | In vivo  | HILIC-ESI + | 516.306 | 35.5 | 0.81 (0.67 - 0.96) | 0.016 |
| L-2-hydroxyglutarate        | In vitro | C18-ESI      | 147.03  | 29.2 | 1.40 (1.05 - 1.85) | 0.02  |
| 4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid | In vivo  | HILIC-ESI + | 181.053 | 41   | 1.30 (1.11 - 1.52) | 0.001 |