4. Gao X, Schwarzschild MA, O ' Reilly EJ, Wang H, Ascherio A. Restless legs syndrome and Parkinson ' s disease in men. Mov Disord 2010;25(15):2654 -2657.
5. Wong JC, Li Y, Schwarzschild MA, Ascherio A, Gao X. Restless legs syndrome: an early clinical feature of Parkinson disease in men. Sleep 2014;37(2):369 -372.
6. Szatmari S Jr, Bereczki D, Fornadi K, Kalantar-Zadeh K, Kovesdy CP, Molnar MZ. Association of restless legs syndrome with incident Parkinson ' s disease. Sleep 2017;40(2):zsw065.
7. Jiménez-Jiménez FJ, Alonso-Navarro H, García-Martín E, Agúndez JA. Neurochemical features of idiopathic restless legs syndrome. Sleep Med Rev 2019;45:70 -87.
8. Ryu JH, Lee MS, Baik JS. Sonographic abnormalities in idiopathic restless legs syndrome (RLS) and RLS in Parkinson ' s disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2011;17(3):201 -203.
9. Alberts J, Adler CH, Saling M, Stelmach G. Prehension patterns in restless legs syndrome patients. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2001;7(2):143 -148.
10. Ferini-Strambi L, Carli G, Casoni F, Galbiati A. Restless legs syndrome and Parkinson disease: a causal relationship between the two disorders? Front Neurol 2018;9:551.
11. Kia DA, Noyce AJ, White J, et al. Mendelian randomization study shows no causal relationship between circulating urate levels and Parkinson ' s disease. Ann Neurol 2018;84(2):191 -199.
12. Schormair B, Zhao C, Bell S, et al. Identi fi cation of novel risk loci for restless legs syndrome in genome-wide association studies in individuals of European ancestry: a meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol 2017;16(11):898 -907.
13. Nalls MA, Blauwendraat C, Vallerga CL, et al. Identi fi cation of novel risk loci, causal insights, and heritable risk for Parkinson ' s disease: a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies. Lancet Neurol 2019;18(12):1091 -1102.
14. Burgess S. Sample size and power calculations in Mendelian randomization with a single instrumental variable and a binary outcome. Int J Epidemiol 2014;43(3):922 -929.
15. Burgess S, Thompson SG, Collaboration CCG. Avoiding bias from weak instruments in Mendelian randomization studies. Int J Epidemiol 2011;40(3):755 -764.
16. Bowden J, Holmes MV. Meta-analysis and Mendelian randomization: a review. Res Synth Methods 2019;10(4):486 -496.
17. Verbanck M, Chen C-y, Neale B, Do R. Detection of widespread horizontal pleiotropy in causal relationships inferred from Mendelian randomization between complex traits and diseases. Nat Genet 2018;50(5):693 -698.
18. Machiela MJ, Chanock SJ. LDlink: a web-based application for exploring population-speci fi c haplotype structure and linking correlated alleles of possible functional variants. Bioinformatics 2015;31 (21):3555 -3557.
19. Bulik-Sullivan BK, Loh P-R, Finucane HK, et al. LD score regression distinguishes confounding from polygenicity in genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet 2015;47(3):291 -295.
20. Bulik-Sullivan B, Finucane HK, Anttila V, et al. An atlas of genetic correlations across human diseases and traits. Nat Genet 2015;47(11):1236.
21. Mohtashami S, He Q, Ruskey JA, et al. TOX3 variants are involved in restless legs syndrome and Parkinson ' s disease with opposite effects. J Mol Neurosci 2018;64(3):341 -345.
22. Pittock SJ, Parrett T, Adler CH, Parisi JE, Dickson DW, Ahlskog JE. Neuropathology of primary restless leg syndrome: absence of speci fi c τ -and α -synuclein pathology. Mov Disord 2004;19(6):695 -699.
23. Connor JR, Wang X-S, Allen RP, et al. Altered dopaminergic pro fi le in the putamen and substantia nigra in restless leg syndrome. Brain 2009;132(9):2403 -2412.
24. Connor JR, Boyer P, Menzies S, et al. Neuropathological examination suggests impaired brain iron acquisition in restless legs syndrome. Neurology 2003;61(3):304 -309.
25. Connor JR, Wang X, Patton S, et al. Decreased transferrin receptor expression by neuromelanin cells in restless legs syndrome. Neurology 2004;62(9):1563 -1567.
26. Gan-Or Z, Alcalay RN, Bar-Shira A, et al. Genetic markers of restless legs syndrome in Parkinson disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2015;21(6):582 -585.
27. Vilariño-Güell C, Soto A, Young J, et al. Susceptibility genes for restless legs syndrome are not associated with Parkinson disease. Neurology 2008;71(3):222 -223.
28. Adel S, Djarmati A, Kabakci K, et al. Co-occurrence of restless legs syndrome and Parkin mutations in two families. Mov Disord 2006; 21(2):258 -263.
29. Tan EK, Yew K, Chua E, et al. PINK1 mutations in sporadic earlyonset Parkinson ' s disease. Mov Disord 2006;21(6):789 -793.
30. Lahut S, Vadasz D, Depboylu C, et al. The PD-associated alphasynuclein promoter Rep1 allele 2 shows diminished frequency in restless legs syndrome. Neurogenetics 2014;15(3):189 -192.
31. Di Angelantonio E, Thompson SG, Kaptoge S, et al. Ef fi ciency and safety of varying the frequency of whole blood donation (INTERVAL): a randomised trial of 45 000 donors. Lancet 2017; 390(10110):2360 -2371.

## Supporting Data

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher ' s web-site.

## Longitudinal Analysis of Multiple Neurotransmitter Metabolites in Cerebrospinal Fluid in Early Parkinson ' s Disease

Thomas Kremer, PhD, 1 * Kirsten I. Taylor, PhD, 1,2 Juliane Siebourg-Polster, PhD, 3 Thomas Gerken, PhD, 4 Andreas Staemp fl i, PhD, 5 Christian Czech, PhD, 1, † Juergen Dukart, PhD, 1,6,7 Douglas Galasko, MD, 8 Tatiana Foroud, PhD, 9 Lana M. Chahine, MD, 10 Christopher S. Coffey, PhD, 11 Tanya Simuni, MD, 12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -† Current address for Dr. Czech: P fi zer Rare Disease Unit, Berlin, Germany

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non-commercial and no modi fi cations or adaptations are made.

*Correspondence to: Dr. Thomas Kremer, Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development NRD Discovery &amp; Translational Area Roche Innovation Center Basel, Grenzacherstrasse 124, Basel 4070, Switzerland; E-mail: thomas.kremer@roche.com

Relevant con fl icts of interest/Financial disclosures: T.K., J.S.-P., A.S., S.D., K.I.T., and G.P. are employees of F. Hoffmann -La Roche Ltd. and respective af fi liates. T.G. is a former employee of Metanomics Health GmbH. J.D. is a former employee and received consultancy fees from F. Hoffmann -La Roche Ltd. This does not alter our adherence to policies on sharing data and materials.

Full fi nancial disclosures and author roles may be found in the online version of this article.

Received: 15 September 2020; Revised: 15 March 2021; Accepted: 16 March 2021

Published online 4 May 2021 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/mds.28608

Daniel Weintraub, MD, 13 John Seibyl, MD, 14 Kathleen L. Poston, MD, 15 Arthur W. Toga, PhD, 16 Caroline M. Tanner, MD, PhD, 17,18 Kenneth Marek, MD, 14,19 Samantha J. Hutten, PhD, 19 Sebastian Dziadek, PhD, 1 Claudia Trenkwalder, MD, 20,21 Gennaro Pagano, MD, 1 and Brit Mollenhauer, MD 21,22

1 Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, NRD Neuroscience and Rare Diseases, Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann -La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland 2 Faculty of Psychology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland 3 Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Pharmaceutical Sciences, Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann -La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland 4 Metanomics Health GmbH, Berlin, Germany 5 Roche Pharmaceutical Research and Early Development, Therapeutic Modalities, Roche Innovation Center Basel, F. Hoffmann -La Roche Ltd., Basel, Switzerland 6 Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine, Brain &amp; Behaviour (INM-7), Research Centre Jülich, Julich, Germany 7 Institute of Systems Neuroscience, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany 8 Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California, USA 9 Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA 10 Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 11 Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA 12 Parkinson ' s Disease and Movement Disorders Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA 13 Department of Neurology Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 14 Institute for Neurodegenerative Disorders, New Haven, Connecticut, USA 15 Department of Neurology &amp; Neurological Sciences, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA 16 Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, University of Southern California (USC) Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute, Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA 17 Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA 18 Parkinson ' s Disease Research Education and Clinical Center, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Health Care System, San Diego, California, USA 19 The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson ' s Research, New York, New York, USA 20 Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany 21 Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Kassel, Germany 22 Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany mds28608-curr-0001 Current address for Dr. Czech: P fi zer Rare Disease Unit, Berlin, Germany

ABSTRACT: Background : Cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) levels of monoamine metabolites may represent biomarkers of Parkinson ' s disease (PD).

Objective : The aim of this study was quanti fi cation of multiple metabolites in CSF from PD versus healthy control subjects (HCs), including longitudinal analysis.

Methods : Absolute levels of multiple monoamine metabolites in CSF were quanti fi ed by liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry from 161 individuals with early PD and 115 HCs from the Parkinson ' s Progression Marker Initiative and de novo PD (DeNoPA) studies.

Results : Baseline levels of homovanillic acid (HVA) and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) were lower in individuals with PD compared with HCs. HVA levels correlated with Movement Disorder Society Unifi ed Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale total scores ( P &lt; 0.01). Both HVA/dopamine and DOPAC/dopamine levels correlated with caudate nucleus and raw DOPAC with putamen dopamine transporter singlephoton emission computed tomography uptake ratios ( P &lt; 0.01). No metabolite changed over 2 years in drug-naive individuals, but some changed on starting levodopa treatment.

Conclusions : HVA and DOPAC CSF levels mirrored nigrostriatal pathway damage, con fi rming the central role of dopaminergic degeneration in early PD. © 2021 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society

Key Words: monoamine metabolites; catecholamine; neurotransmitter; biomarker; Parkinson ' s disease; CSF; homovanillic acid

Parkinson ' s disease (PD) is characterized by progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta, 1 but also depletion of other neurotransmitters, such as serotonin in the striatum and noradrenaline in the hypothalamus and frontal cortex. 2,3 Cerebrospinal fl uid (CSF) represents the most proximal source of molecular biomarkers for these de fi ciencies. 4 Although quanti fi cation of CSF protein biomarkers improves early diagnosis in Alzheimer ' s disease, 5 no analogous protein biomarkers for PD diagnosis exist. Neurotransmitter metabolites represent a potential proxy to PD-speci fi c neurodegeneration and may serve as promising biomarkers of disease severity and its progression.

Several studies investigating dopamine metabolites in PD found consistent signatures, in particular, decreased levels of the main dopamine metabolite homovanillic acid (HVA). 6-10 However, their utility for monitoring disease progression has been questioned, mainly because of the results of the DATATOP (deprenyl and tocopherol antioxidative therapy of parkinsonism) study in which repeated CSF measurements of dopamine metabolites by gas chromatography -mass spectrometry yielded variable results. Despite efforts to standardize CSF collection, processing, and measurement, 11,12 potential confounding factors on catecholamine levels remain (eg, diurnal changes, total CSF volume) and may impede the reliable quanti fi cation. 13-16

Although high-performance liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection (HPLC-ECD) and gas chromatography -mass spectrometry were previously

considered gold standards for analyzing dopamine and its metabolites, 7,11 LC -MS/MS (liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry) has evolved during the last two decades with comparable sensitivity to HPLCECD and greatly improved selectivity. 17,18 LC -MS/MS reduces the complexity of preanalytical processing 17 and is now considered the gold standard for quantitative analytics. This enables simultaneous analyses of metabolites of the dopaminergic (eg, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine [DOPA], dopamine, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid [DOPAC]), noradrenergic (eg, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol, 4-hydroxy3-methoxyphenylglycol) and serotonergic (eg, 5-hydroxy3-indoleacetic acid [5-HIAA]) pathways in bio fl uids, including CSF. 19

We for the fi rst time applied LC -MS/MS to measure multiple monoamine metabolite concentrations in human CSF samples from the single-center de novo PD (DeNoPa)-cohort, 20,21 including longitudinal analysis in the multicenter Parkinson ' s Progressive Markers Initiative (PPMI) 22-24 study, to assess their utility as biomarkers of both PD severity and its progression.

## Materials and Methods

## Study Participants and CSF Sampling Procedure

## DeNoPa Cohort

CSF baseline samples from 49 age- and sex-matched healthy control subjects (HC) and 62 drug-naive PD participants were analyzed from the DeNoPa study. 20 CSF samples were collected and processed as previously described. 25

## PPMI Cohort

Baseline and 1-year CSF samples from 56 HCs and 95 age-, sex-, body mass index (BMI)-, and total CSF volume-matched participants with dopamine transporter single-photon emission computed tomography (DaT-SPECT)-con fi rmed PD were analyzed (https:// www.ppmi-info.org/study-design/). Fifty-four individuals with PD remained unmedicated at the 1-year visit, while 39 individuals with PD had started L-dopa medication. Two-year follow-up CSF samples were available from all 56 HCs and 39 individuals with PD, all of whom were on L-dopa medication. Clinical and medication data were retrieved from the PPMI data portal (https://www.ppmi-info.org/access-dataspecimens/download-data/). CSF samples were collected and processed following standardized procedures (https://www.ppmi-info.org/study-design/) (see also The Parkinson ' s Progression Marker Initiative 24 and Kang 26 ).

A comparison of CSF sampling procedures for DeNoPa and PPMI is provided in Table S4.

Demographics and clinical characteristics for DeNoPa and PPMI are provided in Table S1. Both studies were approved by the ethics committees: in Frankfurt (Hessen, Germany) for DeNoPa and the Institutional Review Board of all participating sites for PPMI. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before inclusion in the study.

## Metabolite Quanti fi cation

Absolute metabolite quanti fi cation was performed at Metanomics Health GmbH, Germany. CSF samples were subjected to ultracentrifugation and dansyl chloride derivatization prior to solid-phase extraction and LC -MS/MS analysis: data were normalized against internal standards and quanti fi ed using calibration standards as previously described. 17,27 The metabolite panels that were analyzed, including their limit of detection, are provided in Table S2. Technical robustness of the analytical method was con fi rmed in a subset of seven CSF randomly selected blinded samples from the DeNoPa study (see Table S3). Ratios were derived for analyses of metabolite levels normalized by the concentration of the respective neurotransmitter. Stringent procedures to minimize time between thawing and monoamine metabolite analysis were consistently applied for all samples.

## Statistical Analysis

All statistical analyses were performed using R and are described in detail in the Supporting Data.

## Results

## Demographic and Clinical Data in the DeNoPa and PPMI Cohorts

Groups did not differ with respect to mean age (± standard deviation) (HC: 65.6 ± 6.6, PD: 64.1 ± 9.4, F = 1.2, P = 0.28) or sex distribution (HCs [male/ female]: 30/19, PD: 42/20, χ 2 = 0.51, P = 0.47) in the DeNoPa study. Groups differed with respect to Movement Disorder Society Uni fi ed Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale (MDS UPDRS) Part III (HC: 0.35 ± 1.03, PD: 19.4 ± 9.9, F = 386, P &lt; 0.001) and total scores (HC: 3.1 ± 2.8, PD: 29.8 ± 15.6, F = 290, P &lt; 0.001).

Groups had comparable baseline ages (mean ± standard deviation) (HC: 62.7 ± 10.7, PD: 62.4 ± 9.8, F = 0.21, P = 0.65), sex distributions (HCs [male/female]: 40/16, PD: 64/31, χ 2 = 0.27, P = 0.6), BMI (HC: 26.8 ± 5.2, PD: 26.7 ± 4.2, F = 0.06, P = 0.95), and total CSF volume (HC: 17.8 ± 3.1, PD: 16.9 ± 2.9, F = 1.9, P = 0.15) but differed with respect to MDS UPDRS Part III (HC: 1.2 ± 2.0, PD: 21.1 ± 8.5, F = 346, P &lt; 0.001) and total scores (HC: 4.7 ± 4.0, PD: 33.4 ± 13.5, F = 318, P &lt; 0.001) in the PPMI study (see Table S1).

## Quanti fi able Metabolites

Overall,  metabolites could be quanti fi ed in the DeNoPa and  in the PPMI samples, and they were considered in further analyses. The upper levels of detection were reached in some PPMI PD samples for 3-methoxytyrosine (25%) and DOPA (13%).

## CSF Monoamine Metabolite Levels at Baseline

Given that dopamine levels in the DeNoPa cohort were mostly below the limit of detection for multiple samples, only nonratio metabolite and neurotransmitter levels were analyzed. Four metabolites differed between DeNoPa PD and HC groups: HVA (estimate = -0.41 ± 0.10, P &lt; 0.0001, effect size = 0.13), 5HIAA (estimate = -0.32 ± 0.10, P = 0.002, effect size = 0.08), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenylglycol (estimate = -0.12 ± 0.04, P = 0.008, effect size = 0.05), and DOPAC (estimate = -0.25 ± 0.09, P = 0.06, effect size = 0.04) (see Table S5).

The DeNoPa fi ndings were partially con fi rmed in the PPMI samples, in which HVA and DOPAC raw and normalized levels differed between HC and PD groups (HVA: estimate = -0.33 ± 0.07, P &lt; 0.0001, effect size = 0.15; DOPAC: estimate = 0.2 ± 0.07, P = 0.01, effect size = 0.06) (see Table 1 and Fig. 1; ROC curves are provided in Fig. S1).

In the PPMI cohort, dopamine could be reliably quanti fi ed in &gt;97% of the samples, which was supported by test -retest analysis for a subset of samples (see Table S3) and allowed analyses of metabolite ratios. PD CSF levels of HVA correlated with MDS UPDRS total scores (r = -0.26, P &lt; 0.01). Both HVA/dopamine and DOPAC/dopamine correlated with DaT-SPECT uptake ratios of the mean caudate (both ratios: r = 0.28; P &lt; 0.01) and ipsilateral caudate nucleus (both ratios: r = 0.29, P &lt; 0.01), while raw DOPAC levels correlated with ipsilateral and mean putamen DaT-SPECT uptake ratios (r = 0.27 and r = 0.28, respectively, both P &lt; 0.01; see Fig. S2).

## Long-Term Within-Subject Stability

Within-subject signal stability in longitudinal analyses was assessed by calculating the intraclass correlation coef fi cient (ICC) for the PPMI HCs at baseline, year 1, and year 2 test values. ICCs ranged from 0.19 (for histamine) to 0.74 (for HIAA), with a median of 0.69 (see Table 1).

## Change of Catecholamine Metabolite Levels over Time

No raw or normalized metabolite level changed signi fi cantly over 1 year in unmedicated PPMI PD patients (all P &gt; 0.05). Dopaminergic medication affected the levels of DOPA, methoxytyrosine, dopamine, and their respective metabolite ratios (see Fig. S3).

## Discussion

This study measured absolute quantities of multiple monoamine metabolites in longitudinal CSF samples from individuals with early PD in the presence and absence of dopaminergic medication.

Various cross-sectional studies on CSF monoamine metabolites in individuals with PD have been performed. 6-10,28-30 However, longitudinal analyses were lacking because the large multicenter DATATOP trial reported no difference in CSF HVA and DOPAC in early PD and during disease progression. 7,11 Longitudinal analyses suffered from high intrapatient variability. 11 We hypothesized that multiple factors, such as preanalytical sample processing, site-to-site variability, 31 and misdiagnoses in PD, 32 may have affected the results. Also, the complex analytical method applied may add to the observed variability. 12 This study aimed to address these factors with a robust single-center recruitment (DeNoPa cohort), DaT-SPECT con fi rmation of diagnoses in most DeNoPa and all PPMI subjects, and clinical follow-up and LC -MS/MS method for absolute quanti fi cation of metabolites. 17,19

CSF levels of DOPAC and HVA, the end product of dopamine metabolism, were reduced in early PD, confi rming previous cross-sectional studies. 8-10,28,29 Correlations observed for dopaminergic metabolites with MDS UPDRS total scores and DaT-SPECT uptake values support that nigrostriatal neurodegeneration is relevant to early PD and that de fi ciencies are re fl ected in CSF.

CSF procedures applied in both studies relied on consensus guidelines and are not necessarily optimized for a given metabolite. 33 Thus, absolute values obtained in this study may be affected by ex vivo changes and should be interpreted accordingly. Despite this limitation, the comparably low intrapatient signal variability for a subset of metabolites in longitudinal HC samples is encouraging and supports the future use of this assay in longitudinal studies.

The utility of CSF neurotransmitter metabolite levels to identify prodromal PD or differentiate PD from atypical parkinsonian syndromes remain open questions. Encouraging results from a small prospective cohort study support analysis of CSF monoamine metabolites in prodromal cohorts to identify people who will develop clinical PD. 34 Given the proximity of this biomarker panel to the underlying disease pathology, as supported by the present DaT-SPECT results, it may also identify PD subtypes with diverging neurotransmitter systems de fi ciencies. Although the present longitudinal data span a relatively short time frame,

K R E M E R

TABLE 1. CSF levels for monoamine metabolites in the PPMI cohort

E T

A L

| Sensitivity         | 1.00              | 0.89          | 1.00          | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00                             | 0.99        | 0.96          | 0.93          | 0.87        | 1.00             | 0.00            | 0.93                   | 0.84                      | 0.96                | 1.00               | 0.95         | 0.85               | 0.99 1.00                     |
| PD-HC Speci fi city | 0.00              | 0.23          | 0.00          | 0.00        | 0.00        | 0.00                             | 0.07        | 0.13          | 0.02          | 0.43        | 0.00             | 1.00            | 0.24                   | 0.38                      | 0.07                | 0.00 0.07          | 0.47         | 0.02               | 0.00                          |
| Difference AUC      | 0.54              | 0.63          | 0.53          | 0.53        | 0.57        | 0.54                             | 0.59        | 0.61          | 0.58          | 0.71        | 0.56             | 0.47            | 0.64                   | 0.71                      | 0.62                | 0.55 0.61          | 0.77         | 0.58               | 0.55                          |
| P Value             | 0.64              | 0.011         | 0.85          | 0.50        | 0.51        | 0.84                             | 0.076       | 0.072         | 0.077         | <0.0001     | 0.48             | 0.76            | 0.013                  | <0.0001                   | 0.086 0.45          | 0.082              | <0.0001      | 0.17               | 0.31                          |
| Estimate            | - 0.02            | - 0.20        | - 0.01        | 0.04        | - 0.04      | - 0.02                           | - 0.12      | 0.15          | 0.25          | - 0.33      | 0.08             | 0.02            | - 0.17 - 0.35          | 0.16                      | - 0.05              | - 0.13             | - 0.48       | 0.09               | - 0.07                        |
| 95) <LOD            | 0.00              | 0.00          | 0.00          | 0.00        | 0.00        | 1.31                             | 0.00        | 2.62          | 24.02         | 0.00        | 0.00             | 0.00            | 0.03                   | 0.03 0.03                 | 0.00                | 0.00               | 0.03         | 0.00               | 0.00                          |
| PD (n = Mean ± SD   | 2.79 ± 2.11       | - 0.99 ± 0.77 | 0.59 ± 1.42   | 0.50 ± 0.37 | 2.00 ± 0.25 | - 0.13 ± 0.33                    | 3.53 ± 0.45 | - 4.19 ± 0.61 | - 2.32 ± 0.95 | 3.74 ± 0.60 | - 1.47 ± 0.44    | - 2.27 ± 0.43   | 6.78 ± 0.56            | 3.22 ± 0.55 - 4.82 ± 1.10 | 1.97 ± 0.38         | 3.47 ± 0.38        | 7.95 ± 0.50  | - 2.06 ± 1.46      | - 0.79 ± 0.28                 |
| ICC                 | 0.58              | 0.74          | 0.63          | 0.70        | 0.47        | 0.69                             | 0.74        | 0.61          | 0.19          | 0.71        | 0.69             | 0.71            | n/a                    | n/a                       | n/a n/a             | n/a                | n/a          | n/a                | n/a                           |
| (n = 56) <LOD       | 0.00              | 0.00          | 0.00          | 0.00        | 0.00        | 0.00                             | 0.00        | 2.38          | 18.45         | 0.00        | 0.00             | 0.00            | 0.02                   | 0.02                      | 0.02 0.00           | 0.00               | 0.02         | 0.00               | 0.00                          |
| HC Mean ± SD        | 1.33 ± 0.28       | - 1.10 ± 0.41 | - 0.31 ± 0.25 | 0.49 ± 0.32 | 2.07 ± 0.23 | - 0.14 ± 0.34                    | 3.71 ± 0.45 | - 4.58 ± 0.41 | - 2.56 ± 0.44 | 3.85 ± 0.42 | - 1.52 ± 0.46    | - 2.28 ± 0.43   | 7.22 ± 0.39            | 3.49 ± 0.43 - 4.28 ± 0.41 | 2.01 ± 0.42         | 3.59 ± 0.40        | 8.44 ± 0.45  | - 1.21 ± 0.43      | - 0.76 ± 0.23                 |
|                     | 3-Methoxytyrosine |               |               |             |             | 4-Hydroxy-3-methoxymandelic acid |             |               |               |             | (norepinephrine) |                 | + NM+HMPG+NA)/dopamine | DOPAC/dopamine            | Dopamine/DOPA       | HMPG/noradrenaline |              | Noradrenaline/DOPA | Normetanephrine/noradrenaline |
| Variable            |                   | DOPAC         | DOPA          | DOPEG       | HMPG        |                                  | 5-HIAA      | Dopamine      | Histamine     | HVA         | Noradrenaline    | Normetanephrine | (DOPEG                 |                           | DOPEG/noradrenaline |                    | HVA/dopamine |                    |                               |

Monoamine metabolite levels in PPMI HC and PD CSF samples: levels (log2 transformed), percentages &lt;LOD, ICCs to assess stability between baseline, 1-year follow-up, and 2-year follow-up in the PPMI HC group, HC-PD group differences with corresponding AUC and receiver operating characteristics curves, and speci fi city and sensitivity. Boldface re fl ects signi fi cant case -control differences after multiple testing correction. CSF, cerebrospinal fl uid; PPMI, Parkinson ' s Progressive Markers Initiative; HC, healthy control; PD, Parkinson ' s disease; SD, standard deviation; LOD, below the limit of detection; ICC, intraclass correlation coef fi cient; AUC, area under the curve; DOPAC, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; DOPA, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine; DOPEG; 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol; HMPG, 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenylglycol; 5-HIAA, 5-hydroxy-3-indoleacetic acid; HVA, homovanillic acid; n/a, not applicable.

CSF level (log2 intensities)

CSF level (log ratio)

HVA

Control

HVA / dopamine

FIG. 1. Baseline levels of ( A ) homovanillic acid (HVA) and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) and ( B ) HVA/dopamine and DOPAC/dopamine in healthy control (HC; blue) and Parkinson ' s disease (PD; orange) Parkinson ' s Progressive Markers Initiative participants. CSF, cerebrospinal fl uid. [Color fi gure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

clinical follow-up of the PPMI continued since our analysis was performed, and additional information on clinical scales and for various biomarker modalities is available, including their progression with time. We encourage researchers to use our data, which are accessible for downloading, to further deepen our understanding of PD pathophysiology and its progression.

Acknowledgments: This work was supported by The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson ' s Research, Abbott, Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen Idec, Covance, Elan, Eli Lilly and Co, F. Hoffmann -LaRoche Ltd., GE Healthcare, Genentech, Glaxo Smith Kline, Merck and Co., P fi zer Inc., and UCB Pharma SA. The DeNoPa study was supported by unrestricted research grants from the Paracelsus-ElenaKlinik, Kassel, Germany, and unrestricted research grants from TEVA Pharma/Lundbeck, Parkinson Fonds Deutschland, The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson ' s research, and Deutsche Parkinson Vereinigung. The monoamine metabolite analysis was entirely funded by F. Hoffmann -La Roche. This funder provided support in the form of salaries for authors

(T.K., K.I.T., J.S.-P., A.S., C.C., J.D., S.D., G.P.) but did not have any additional role in the study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. PPMI is sponsored by The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson ' s Research (MJFF) and is cofunded by MJFF, AbbVie, Avid Radiopharmaceuticals, Biogen Idec, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Covance, Eli Lilly &amp; Co., F. Hoffman-La Roche, Ltd., GE Healthcare, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Lundbeck, Merck, MesoScale, Piramal, P fi zer, and UCB. The funders had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The authors thank The Michael J. Fox Foundation, their PPMI colleagues, and the individuals who participated in this study.

## Table 1

| 0                   | 1                 | 2             | 3             | 4           | 5           | 6                                | 7           | 8             | 9             | 10          | 11               | 12              | 13                     | 14                        | 15                  | 16                 | 17           | 18                 | 19                            |
|:--------------------|:------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:------------|:------------|:---------------------------------|:------------|:--------------|:--------------|:------------|:-----------------|:----------------|:-----------------------|:--------------------------|:--------------------|:-------------------|:-------------|:-------------------|:------------------------------|
| Sensitivity         | 1.00              | 0.89          | 1.00          | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00                             | 0.99        | 0.96          | 0.93          | 0.87        | 1.00             | 0.00            | 0.93                   | 0.84                      | 0.96                | 1.00               | 0.95         | 0.85               | 0.99 1.00                     |
| PD-HC Speci fi city | 0.00              | 0.23          | 0.00          | 0.00        | 0.00        | 0.00                             | 0.07        | 0.13          | 0.02          | 0.43        | 0.00             | 1.00            | 0.24                   | 0.38                      | 0.07                | 0.00 0.07          | 0.47         | 0.02               | 0.00                          |
| Difference AUC      | 0.54              | 0.63          | 0.53          | 0.53        | 0.57        | 0.54                             | 0.59        | 0.61          | 0.58          | 0.71        | 0.56             | 0.47            | 0.64                   | 0.71                      | 0.62                | 0.55 0.61          | 0.77         | 0.58               | 0.55                          |
| P Value             | 0.64              | 0.011         | 0.85          | 0.50        | 0.51        | 0.84                             | 0.076       | 0.072         | 0.077         | <0.0001     | 0.48             | 0.76            | 0.013                  | <0.0001                   | 0.086 0.45          | 0.082              | <0.0001      | 0.17               | 0.31                          |
| Estimate            | - 0.02            | - 0.20        | - 0.01        | 0.04        | - 0.04      | - 0.02                           | - 0.12      | 0.15          | 0.25          | - 0.33      | 0.08             | 0.02            | - 0.17 - 0.35          | 0.16                      | - 0.05              | - 0.13             | - 0.48       | 0.09               | - 0.07                        |
| 95) <LOD            | 0.00              | 0.00          | 0.00          | 0.00        | 0.00        | 1.31                             | 0.00        | 2.62          | 24.02         | 0.00        | 0.00             | 0.00            | 0.03                   | 0.03 0.03                 | 0.00                | 0.00               | 0.03         | 0.00               | 0.00                          |
| PD (n = Mean ± SD   | 2.79 ± 2.11       | - 0.99 ± 0.77 | 0.59 ± 1.42   | 0.50 ± 0.37 | 2.00 ± 0.25 | - 0.13 ± 0.33                    | 3.53 ± 0.45 | - 4.19 ± 0.61 | - 2.32 ± 0.95 | 3.74 ± 0.60 | - 1.47 ± 0.44    | - 2.27 ± 0.43   | 6.78 ± 0.56            | 3.22 ± 0.55 - 4.82 ± 1.10 | 1.97 ± 0.38         | 3.47 ± 0.38        | 7.95 ± 0.50  | - 2.06 ± 1.46      | - 0.79 ± 0.28                 |
| ICC                 | 0.58              | 0.74          | 0.63          | 0.70        | 0.47        | 0.69                             | 0.74        | 0.61          | 0.19          | 0.71        | 0.69             | 0.71            | n/a                    | n/a                       | n/a n/a             | n/a                | n/a          | n/a                | n/a                           |
| (n = 56) <LOD       | 0.00              | 0.00          | 0.00          | 0.00        | 0.00        | 0.00                             | 0.00        | 2.38          | 18.45         | 0.00        | 0.00             | 0.00            | 0.02                   | 0.02                      | 0.02 0.00           | 0.00               | 0.02         | 0.00               | 0.00                          |
| HC Mean ± SD        | 1.33 ± 0.28       | - 1.10 ± 0.41 | - 0.31 ± 0.25 | 0.49 ± 0.32 | 2.07 ± 0.23 | - 0.14 ± 0.34                    | 3.71 ± 0.45 | - 4.58 ± 0.41 | - 2.56 ± 0.44 | 3.85 ± 0.42 | - 1.52 ± 0.46    | - 2.28 ± 0.43   | 7.22 ± 0.39            | 3.49 ± 0.43 - 4.28 ± 0.41 | 2.01 ± 0.42         | 3.59 ± 0.40        | 8.44 ± 0.45  | - 1.21 ± 0.43      | - 0.76 ± 0.23                 |
|                     | 3-Methoxytyrosine |               |               |             |             | 4-Hydroxy-3-methoxymandelic acid |             |               |               |             | (norepinephrine) |                 | + NM+HMPG+NA)/dopamine | DOPAC/dopamine            | Dopamine/DOPA       | HMPG/noradrenaline |              | Noradrenaline/DOPA | Normetanephrine/noradrenaline |
| Variable            |                   | DOPAC         | DOPA          | DOPEG       | HMPG        |                                  | 5-HIAA      | Dopamine      | Histamine     | HVA         | Noradrenaline    | Normetanephrine | (DOPEG                 |                           | DOPEG/noradrenaline |                    | HVA/dopamine |                    |                               |