
Published in partnership with the Parkinson ' s Foundation

Kara A. Johnson 1,2,3 , Patricia B. Coutinho 1,2 , Lauren E. Kenney 4 , Joshua K. Wong 1,2 , Justin D. Hilliard 1,3 , Kelly D. Foote 1,3 , Dawn Bowers 1,4 , Gregory M. Pontone 1,2 &amp; Coralie de Hemptinne 1,2

Depressionisincreasinglyrecognizedasaprevalentsourceofdisabilityinindividuals withParkinson ' s disease (PD), but its pathophysiology is not well understood. Neural activity in the basal ganglia, particularly the subthalamic nucleus, has been linked to depression in PD, but the role of the pallidum remains unclear. This retrospective study aimed to correlate preoperative depression symptoms with intraoperative resting-state neural activity recorded from the pallidum in N = 50 patients who underwent deep-brain stimulation (DBS) implantation surgery. Patients with clinically elevated depression symptoms exhibited elevated beta (13 -30 Hz) power compared to patients without depression. Beta power, particularly high beta (20 -30 Hz) power, was also associated with depression symptom severity, even when controlling for other demographic, clinical, pharmacological, and neurophysiological variables. These results suggest pallidal beta power as a potential biomarker of depression in PD and set the stage for tailoring DBS therapy to improve psychiatric symptoms in PD.

Parkinson ' s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder mainly characterized by motor symptoms, such as bradykinesia, tremor, rigidity, and postural instability 1 . Although PD is primarily a movement disorder, depression and other psychiatric symptoms are increasingly recognized as prevalent sources of disability. Depression often presents before motor symptoms and affects an estimated 38% of patients with PD 2 , a higher proportion than other chronic diseases 3 and the general population 4 . Depression in PD is also associated with worsened quality of life and increased caregiver burden 5 -7 . Despite its high prevalence and immenseburden,depressioninPDisunderrecognized,itspathophysiology is not well understood, and current treatments are often inadequate and non-speci fi c to PD 8 .

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) targeted to the basal ganglia is an established treatment for select PD patients experiencing refractory motor symptoms. DBS involves neurosurgical implantation of electrodes into the basal ganglia in either the subthalamic nucleus (STN) or the pallidum (speci fi cally the globus pallidus internus (GPi)) to deliver electrical stimulation to modulate pathological neural activity. Improvement in motor symptoms with DBS is extensively documented in the literature 9 , but some patients may also experience bene fi ts in nonmotor symptoms. Recent meta-analyses have shown that, at a group level, DBS induces a small to moderate improvement in depression, mainly in the short term 10,11 , with potentially greater improvements with pallidal DBS than STN DBS 12 . However,thesemeta-analysesnote substantial heterogeneityacross studies, indicating that depression outcomes vary widely across individuals, from signi fi cant improvement to worsening. This variability may be due to differences in how depression symptoms are assessed (e.g., scales, diagnostic interviews) and the lack of data-driven methods to tailor DBS therapy for depression in PD. Identifying biomarkers of depression in PD, such as neural activity within the basal ganglia, could potentially enable clinicians to harness DBS to treat depression in PD while maintaining effective treatment of motor symptoms.

DBS offers a unique opportunity to study neural activity in the basal ganglia involved in speci fi c symptoms and behavior by recording local fi eld potentials (LFP) in the intra-, peri-, and postoperative environments. Numerous studies have investigated neural activity associated with motor symptoms in PD 13 , with the majority pointing to elevated beta power (13 -30 Hz) in the STN and the pallidum associated with bradykinesia and rigidity 4,14 and with reduction in beta power in response to DBS and levodopa therapy associated with improvement in motor symptoms 15 -17 . In contrast, relatively few studies have investigated neural activity underlying nonmotor symptoms in PD, including depression 18 .

Previous studies investigating neural activity contributing to depression in PD have mainly focused on task paradigms with intra- or perioperative recordings exclusively from the STN. Their results generally indicate that low-frequency oscillations, particularly in theta (4 -7 Hz) and alpha (8 -12 Hz) bands, may be implicated in emotional responses during an affective picture-viewing task 19 -23 . Only two studies have focused on

1 Norman Fixel Institute for Neurological Diseases, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. 2 Department of Neurology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. 3 Department of Neurosurgery, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. 4 Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. e-mail: kara.johnson@neurology.u fl .edu

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-026-01264-4

## Pallidal beta power is associated with depression in Parkinson ' s disease

[Check for updates](http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1038/s41531-026-01264-4&domain=pdf)

Table 1 | Cohort characteristics

|                                               | Total                                                              | Depressed (BDI-II ≥ 14)                                          | Not depressed (BDI-II <14)                                        | Statistical analysis (Depressed vs. not depressed)   |
| Number of patients                            | 50                                                                 | 13 (26.0%)                                                       | 37 (74.0%)                                                        | -                                                    |
| Sex                                           | Male: 33 (66.0%)                                                   | Male: 11 (84.6%)                                                 | Male: 22 (59.5%)                                                  | p * = 0.17                                           |
| Age (years)                                   | 66.32 (8.34, 50 - 81)                                              | 63.46 (9.28, 50 - 80)                                            | 67.32 (7.88, 50 - 81)                                             | t = - 1.45 p = 0.15                                  |
| Disease duration (years)                      | 10.50 (5.06, 2 - 23)                                               | 12.62 (5.19, 6 - 23)                                             | 9.76 (4.87, 2 - 21)                                               | t = 1.79 p = 0.080                                   |
| Recording hemisphere                          | Left: 28 (56.0%)                                                   | Left: 7 (53.9%)                                                  | Left: 21 (56.8%)                                                  | p * = 1.0                                            |
| Evaluation time point (months before surgery) | 4.1 (1.40, 1 - 6)                                                  | 4.39 (1.39, 1 - 6)                                               | 4.00 (1.41, 1 - 6)                                                | t = 0.85 p = 0.40                                    |
| BDI-II                                        | 11.06 (8.14, 2 - 41)                                               | 22.38 (7.23, 14 - 41)                                            | 7.08 (3.17, 2 - 13)                                               | t = 10.45 p < 0.001                                  |
| AS                                            | N = 48 11.56 (6.00, 0 - 24)                                        | N = 13 15.07 (5.74, 4 - 24)                                      | N = 35 10.26 (5.63, 0 - 22)                                       | t = 2.62 p = 0.012                                   |
| STAI-trait                                    | N = 47 36.83 (10.43, 20 - 67)                                      | N = 13 47.38 (11.40, 20 - 67)                                    | N = 34 32.79 (6.61, 21 - 49)                                      | t = 5.48 p < 0.001                                   |
| Antidepressant use                            | 25 (50.0%)                                                         | 8 (61.5%)                                                        | 17 (45.6%)                                                        | p * = 0.52                                           |
| Benzodiazepine use                            | 20 (40.0%)                                                         | 6 (42.9%)                                                        | 14 (37.8%)                                                        | p * = 0.74                                           |
| Non-benzodiazepine hypnotic use               | 22 (44.0%)                                                         | 8 (61.5%)                                                        | 14 (37.8%)                                                        | p * = 0.20                                           |
| UPDRS-III (off levodopa)                      | N = 49 38.53 (13.66, 10 - 72)                                      | N = 13 34.62 (13.33, 10 - 56)                                    | N = 36 39.94 (13.68, 19 - 72)                                     | t = - 1.21 p = 0.23                                  |
| UPDRS-III (on levodopa)                       | N = 49 23.45 (12.09, 4 - 62)                                       | N = 13 21.77 (11.5, 4 - 44)                                      | N = 36 24.06 (12.39, 8 - 62)                                      | t = - 0.58 p = 0.57                                  |
| Motor subtype 105                             | N = 40 PIGD: 24 (60.0%) Tremor: 10 (25.0%) Intermediate: 6 (15.0%) | N = 11 PIGD: 4 (36.4%) Tremor: 4 (36.4%) Intermediate: 3 (27.2%) | N = 29 PIGD: 20 (69.0%) Tremor: 6 (20.7%) Intermediate: 3 (10.3%) | p * = 0.140                                          |
| Levodopa equivalent daily dose (mg/day)       | 1110.66(555.59,60 - 2275)                                          | 1159.77(591.04,60 - 2275)                                        | 1093.41 (550.03, 75 - 2000)                                       | t = 0.37 p = 0.72                                    |

Data presented as mean (SD, range) or number of patients (%).

Depressed PD with clinically elevated depression symptoms (BDI-II ≥ 14), Not depressed PDwithout clinically elevated depression symptoms (BDI-II &lt; 14), BDI-II Beck depression inventory (2nd Edition) (score range: 0 -63). AS , Apathy scale (score range: 0 -42), STAI-trait State-trait anxiety inventory (trait score) (score range: 20 -80), UPDRS Uni fi ed Parkinson ' s disease rating scale (score range: 0 -108). p * -values obtained from Fisher ' s exact tests.

t -values and p -values obtained from unpaired, two-tailed t-tests.

resting-state neural activity, showing that PD patients with depression may exhibit lower theta power and higher alpha power in the left ventral STN compared to non-depressed individuals 24 , and theta/alpha power may be localized to the ventral STN 25 . No prior studies have investigated neural activity in the pallidum associated with depression, either in resting-state or task paradigms. Additionally, previous research has not fully explored correlations across other frequency bands or controlled for potential confounds that may affect depression and neurophysiological activity, such as medication, motor severity, and demographics. Without controlling for such variables, the speci fi city of these candidate biomarkers to depression cannot be determined.

Theobjectiveofthisstudy wastoidentify neurophysiological activityin the pallidum associated with depression symptoms in patients undergoing DBS implantation surgery for the treatment of PD while controlling for potential confounding variables. Identifying neurophysiological activity linked to depression in PD could potentially elucidate the role of the pallidum in the pathophysiology of depression in PD and serve as the basis for further research to identify objective biomarkers of psychiatric symptoms in PD. Such biomarkers could then be used to guide DBS therapy to alleviate these nonmotor symptoms that represent an important determinant of quality of life in individuals with PD.

## Results

## Cohort characteristics

The study cohort included N =50 patients at the University of Florida who underwent DBS electrode implantation surgery targeted to the pallidum for the treatment of PD motor symptoms. The cohort characteristics are reported in Table 1. A subset of N =13 (26.0%) patients were classi fi ed as having PDwithclinically elevated depression symptoms (preoperative BDIII score ≥ 14, based on established criteria using BDI-II to detect and assess depression severity 26 ). Depression symptoms were evaluated on average approximately four months before DBS implantation surgery as part of the standard preoperative neuropsychological assessment to verify candidacy for DBS therapy. The depressed group had signi fi cantly more severe BDI-II scores (unpaired, two-tailed t-test; t =10.45, p &lt; 0.001), Apathy Scale (AS) scores ( t =2.62, p =0.012), and State-Trait Anxiety Inventory Trait (STAITrait) scores ( t =5.48, p &lt; 0.001) than the not depressed group. Half of the cohort ( N =25) was on antidepressant medications as of the clinic visit closest to surgery. No statistically signi fi cant differences were detected across groups in sex, age, disease duration, recording hemisphere, evaluation time point, medication use (antidepressants, benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics), Uni fi ed Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) Part III (UPDRS-III) scores (on and off levodopa medication), baseline motor subtype classi fi cation, or levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD).

## Pallidal activity associated with depression

Imaging analysis con fi rmed that the DBS leads were well placed spanning the posterior GPi/GPe interface across the cohort (Fig. 1A, B). Intraoperative LFP recordings were acquired during DBS lead implantation from all contacts on the DBS lead in monopolar con fi guration with the patient off dopaminergic medication for at least 6 h and at rest (Fig. 1C). The average

GPe -

GPi-

Fig. 1 | Neurophysiological activity in the pallidum associated with depression in PD. A Example DBS lead implantations in the pallidum with anatomical segmentations of the globus pallidus internus (GPi) and externus (GPe) overlaid on the MNI PD25 atlas 101 . B DBS contact locations the study cohort. Each sphere depicts a DBS contact location and is colored by patient number. C Example LFP recording acquired from a DBS contact. D Normalized power averaged across contacts for each patient and compared across depressed PD patients (blue) and not depressed PD patients (gray). Shaded error limits depict standard error of the mean (SEM).

normalized power spectral density (PSD) across all contacts for each patient was then computed to analyze neural activity in de fi ned frequency bands: delta (1 -4 Hz), theta (4 -8 Hz), alpha (8 -12 Hz), beta (13 -30 Hz) [separated into low beta (13 -20 Hz) and high beta (20 -30 Hz)], gamma (30 -100 Hz) [separated into low gamma (30 -50 Hz) and high gamma (50 -100 Hz)], and high-frequency oscillations (HFO) (200 -400 Hz).

Theaverage power in each frequency band was compared between PD patients with clinically elevated depression symptoms and PD patients without depression. PD patients with depression symptoms exhibited signi fi cantly higher pallidal beta power (13 -30 Hz) than PD patients without depression, as shown by the average PSD curves in Fig. 1D and the distribution comparison in Fig. 1E (unpaired, two-tailed t-test; t =2.68, p =0.010, p FDR = 0.049). Power in the low beta (13 -20 Hz) ( t =2.61, p =0.012, p FDR = 0.049) and high beta (20 -30 Hz) ( t =2.53, p =0.015, p FDR = 0.049) were both increased in depressed patients compared to nondepressed. A trend for reduced delta power (1 -4 Hz)wasfoundindepressed patients compared to non-depressed patients ( t = -1.96, p =0.056, p FDR = 0.14). All other frequency bands showed no statistically signi fi cant differences between the two groups. The PSDs across the full frequency range analyzed (1 -500 Hz) were averaged across patients and displayed in Supplementary Fig. 1.

Since beta powersigni fi cantly differed between PD patients with versus without depression, we further investigated whether beta power was also associated with depression severity. Beta power was signi fi cantly positively correlated with depression severity (Pearson correlation; r =0.31, p =0.031, p FDR = 0.047), including high beta power ( r =0.31, p =0.028, p FDR = 0.047) but not low beta power ( r =0.27, p =0.059, p FDR = 0.059).

Beta power has also been previously associated with PD motor symptom severity, prompting further analysis. We found no signi fi cant correlation between OFF-medication UPDRS total scores and beta power

E Depressed PD patients exhibited signi fi cantly higher average beta power (13 -30 Hz) compared to not depressed PD patients (unpaired, two tailed t-test; t = 2.68, p = 0.010, p FDR = 0.049). Box-and-whisker plots denote the following: median (center line), upper and lower quartiles (box limits), lowest/highest data point within 1.5× interquartile range (whiskers), and outliers (outside of the whisker limits). F Average beta power (13 -30 Hz) was signi fi cantly correlated with depression symptom severity (BDI-II scores) (Pearson correlation; r = 0.31, p = 0.028, p FDR = 0.047).

( r = -0.047, p =0.75), including low beta power ( r = -0.048, p =0.75) and high beta power ( r = -0.044, p =0.76). There was also no signi fi cant correlation with ON-medication UPDRS total score (beta: r =0.017, p =0.91; lowbeta: r =0.013, p =0.93; high beta: r =0.019, p =0.90). Correspondingly, there was also no signi fi cant correlation between BDI-II scores and UPDRS total scores either off-medication ( R =0.020, p =0.89) or on-medication ( R =0.03, p =0.84).

## Controlling for demographic, clinical, and neurophysiological variables

Depression is a complex symptom in PD that may be modulated by demographics, motor symptoms, medications, and other psychiatric symptoms. Therefore, a multivariate generalized linear model (GLM) was generated to evaluate the relationship between pallidal neural activity in the de fi ned frequency bands and depression severity (BDI-II scores) while controlling for the following variables: demographics (age, sex, months between BDI-II evaluation and intraoperative LFP recordings), recording variables [hemisphere and normalization curve parameters (1/f curve exponent/slope and offset/intercept)], PD severity and treatment variables [disease duration, UPDRS motor scores both on and off levodopa medication, levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD)], severity of other psychiatric symptoms [apathy (AS scores) and anxiety (STAI-Trait scores)], and psychiatric medication use (antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics). A total of N =45 patients were included in the model, excluding N =5 patients due to missing UPDRS, Apathy Scale, and/or STAI-Trait scores.

The GLMrevealed a signi fi cant positive effect of beta power associated with BDI-II scores (coef fi cient β =4.00, 95% CI = (0.23 -7.78), p =0.038), indicating that higher beta power was associated with higher depression severity (Fig. 2, Supplementary Table 1). Other positive signi fi cant effects

Fig. 2 | GLM to assess the role of other demographic, clinical, medication, and neurophysiological variables in depression severity in PD. GLM coef fi cients and 95% con fi dence intervals for independent variables included in the model. Beta power remained associated with depression severity (BDI-II scores), even when controlling for these other potential confounds.

included STAI-Trait scores (trait anxiety symptom severity) ( β =6.37, 95% CI = (3.70 -9.04), p &lt; 0.001), which re fl ects a correlation between depression and anxiety symptoms, and the intercept of the GLM ( β =10.03, 95% CI = (4.50 -15.56), p &lt; 0.001), which indicates that BDI-II scores were signi fi cantly greater than zero. Similar to the univariate analyses, we also found that in separate GLM analyses, high beta power was signi fi cantly associated with depression severity ( β =4.49, 95% CI = (0.50-8.49), p =0.027) but low beta power was not ( β =3.16, 95% CI = ( -0.40 -6.73), p =0.082). Comparing the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), which measures the relative predictive performance of statistical models, revealed that the GLM using high beta power was the best- fi t model for predicting BDI with the lowest AIC (AIC = 300.29) compared to low beta power (AIC = 303.36) and overall beta power (AIC = 301.18). These results suggest that beta power, especially high beta power, was signi fi cantly associated with depression severity, even when controlling for other possible demographic, clinical, pharmacological, and neurophysiological confounds.

## Discussion

This retrospective study aimed to identify neurophysiological activity in the pallidum associated with depression symptoms in patients undergoing DBS therapy for the treatment of PD using intraoperative resting-state neural recordings and preoperative baseline neuropsychiatric assessments. The results revealed that (1) PD patients with elevated preoperative depression symptomsexhibited signi fi cantly increased pallidal beta power compared to patients without depression, and (2) pallidal beta power, especially high beta power, was signi fi cantly associated with depression severity, even when controlling for potential demographic, clinical, pharmacological, psychiatric, and neurophysiological confounds. To the best of our knowledge, this is the fi rst report of neural activity in the pallidum associated with depression in PD. The involvement of pallidal beta power provides new insight into the role of basal ganglia networks in the pathophysiology of depression in PD and could potentially serve as an objective marker of depression symptoms with further validation.

Thepathophysiology of depression in PD is not fully understood, but it is thought involve alterations in basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical networks as a result of PD-related neurodegeneration. Most evidence of the brain networks implicated in depression in PD has originated from human neuroimaging studies, which generally point to structural, functional, metabolic, and neurotransmitter (particularly dopamine and serotonin) abnormalities in widespread limbic networks involving the basal ganglia, mediodorsal thalamus, amygdala, prefrontal cortex (orbitofrontal, dorsolateral, and ventromedial cortices), and anterior cingulate cortex 27 -29 . Pathophysiological changes in these networks point to abnormal top-down control of emotion-related limbic subcortical regions, causing impairments in motivational, reward, and response initiation processes commonly associated with depression symptoms. Notably, the networks implicated in PD-related depression and the affected cognitive and emotional processes share commonalities with those implicated in depression in non-PD populations 30 -33 .

Our results contribute preliminary evidence that depression in PD is associated with altered neural activity in the pallidum. The pallidum plays a critical role in basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical networks by regulating information fl ow from the cortex via the striatum to the thalamus and ultimately back to the cortex. Although its role in regulating movement is most often discussed, the pallidum also regulates information fl ow in prefrontal/associative and limbic basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical networks, which contribute to cognitive and emotional processing, respectively 34 . Therefore, pathological alterations in the basal ganglia, including the pallidum, have been increasingly linked to psychiatric disorders, including depression 35 .

Alterations in pallidal structure and associated networks provide compelling evidence of its potential role in depression pathophysiology in non-PD and PD populations. Reduced pallidum volume has been consistently observed in non-PD individuals with depression across the lifespan 36 -40 and even subthreshold depression 41 . Patients with depression and PD have been shown to exhibit reduced functional connectivity 42 and abnormal white matter network topology 43 within basal ganglia networks, including the pallidum, compared to non-depressed PD patients and healthy controls. Additionally, the pallidum has been increasingly recognized for its potential role in depression in PD due to its connections to the lateral habenula, which is known for its critical role in regulating negatively motivated behavior and for its implication in depression 44 and more speci fi cally depression in PD 45,46 . The pallidum and lateral habenula have been shown to contribute to reward processing in non-human primate studies 47 -49 , as well as studies using intracranial recordings during reward processing tasks in small cohorts of patients undergoing DBS 50,51 . Altogether, these fi ndings suggest that abnormalities in pallidal structural and functional connectivity and altered reward processing in the pallidal-limbic circuits may contribute to depression pathophysiology.

Modulation of pallidal activity via lesions and DBS also provides clues into its role in depression. In non-PD populations, focal lesions 52 -54 and hyperintensities 55 in the pallidum have been associated with developing depression. In contrast, improvements in depression symptoms have been observed following pallidotomy for the treatment of PD 56,57 , although other studies have found no change 58 . There is also evidence of pallidal DBS inducing a mild but clinically meaningful improvement in depression in PD in controlled trials and meta-analyses 10,11 , as well as improving depression in other neurological disorders like Tourette syndrome 59 and dystonia 60 . However, depression responses to DBS are variable across individuals, and more controlled studies are needed to determine how and where to stimulate within the pallidum to improve and/or avoid worsening depression symptoms. Based on our results, posterior pallidal neural activity, particularly in the beta band, may show promise as a potential marker to guide pallidal DBS to more effectively and consistently alleviate depression in PD.

Elevated beta power in the basal ganglia has been classically associated with motor symptoms in PD, particularly bradykinesia and rigidity, in both the pallidum and the STN 14,61 . Pathological beta power is generally reduced by both levodopa therapy 62 and therapeutic DBS 15 . However, some studies have reported no correlation between beta power and motor symptoms 14,63 ,

including in our present cohort, which may be due to variability in context (e.g., resting-state versus movement or off-DBS versus modulation of power on-DBS)oranatomicallocalization of the lead. Although beta power may be linked to PD pathophysiology, this does not necessarily mean that beta power is only speci fi c to motor symptoms in PD.

Wefoundthatelevated beta power in the pallidum was associated with higher preoperative depression severity, even when controlling for other potentially confounding variables that could have impacted either beta power or depression symptom severity. The preliminary relationship between beta power and depression severity was not explained by variability in sex or age, even though previous studies have found depression to be morecommoninfemales 64 -66 andolderindividuals 67 with PD. Other studies havealso found both depression and beta power to be associated with longer PD disease duration 66 -68 and more severe motor symptoms 64 -66 , as well as fl uctuations in depression tied to levodopa medication state (more severe depression off- than on-medication) 69 . However, these potential confounds did not signi fi cantly impact our results. Finally, depression is a complex psychiatric disorder that is often comorbid with anxiety and apathy in PD 2,70 and is commonly treated with several different medications 8,71 . We found that worse anxiety, but not apathy, was signi fi cantly associated with more severe depression, but this association did not negate the relationship between depression severity and elevated beta power. Additionally, the use of medications commonly used to treat psychiatric symptoms in PD, which could have potentially impacted either depression symptoms or neurophysiological activity, was not a relevant confound. These fi ndings highlight that (1) depression symptoms were not associated with PD motor symptom severity or disease duration, suggesting that depression was likely not simply a reaction to more severe PD impairment, and (2) beta power was signi fi cantly associated with depression severity regardless of variables previously associated with depression.

Although not in the pallidum, other investigations have also found that beta power in limbic networks may play a role in depression in PD and nonPD populations. A recent study in PD patients undergoing DBS who were also implanted with subdural electrodes over the prefrontal cortex found that beta power correlated with self-rated symptoms of depression and anxiety 72 . Other studies using electroencephalography (EEG) have found that PDpatients with depression 73 oranxiety 74,75 exhibitedhigher beta power in prefrontal and central cortical regions. One study even found that prefrontal repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation as an adjunctive therapy for depression in PD reduced prefrontal beta power measured with EEG 76 . Furthermore, depression following basal ganglia stroke lesions, particularly left-sided, has been associated with increased high beta activity in the left frontal and central cortical regions 77 . In patients undergoing DBS for treatment-resistant depression, studies have found beta power in LFP recordings from the subcallosal cingulate cortex is involved in emotional processing 78 -80 and may be a marker of antidepressant response following DBS, speci fi cally a decrease in beta power with acute stimulation 81,82 and potentially an increase in beta power with chronic stimulation 83 . Combined with our results, these previous fi ndings suggest that elevated beta power in speci fi c prefrontal cognitive/limbic networks involving the basal ganglia may play a role in depression pathophysiology.

While our study focused on resting-state neural activity in the pallidum, previous studies of basal ganglia neural activity associated with depression in PD have exclusively investigated the STN and mainly emotional processing tasks. Generally, these studies point to depression in PD potentially involving STN activity in the theta (4 -7 Hz) and alpha (8 -12 Hz) bands 84 . Event-related desynchronization (ERD) in the alpha band, or reduction in power in response to stimuli, has been demonstrated in the STN in response to emotional stimuli compared to neutral stimuli in PD patients 20,21,23 . This ERD was reduced for pleasant stimuli and increased for unpleasant stimuli in PD patients with mild to moderate depression compared to those without depression 21 . Dopaminergic medication may also modulate the observed ERD, with increased ERD in response to pleasant stimuli in the on-medication state and increased ERD in response to unpleasant stimuli in the off-medication state 22 . Alongside alpha activity, two studies also found ERD in the beta band 22,85 , warranting further investigation into beta as another signal that may be implicated in emotional processing in PD.

Only two studies have investigated resting-state neural activity in depression in PD, one of which found that depressed PD patients exhibited increased alpha power and decreased theta power in the left ventral STN 24 ; however, other frequency bands were not examined. Another study determined theta/alpha power may be frequently localized to ventromedial (limbic) STN, and depression severity was negatively correlated with broadband theta/alpha/low beta power (5 -20 Hz) within the ventromedial STNregion 25 . Their reported correlation, including low beta activity, piqued our interest; however, it is in the opposite direction of our present results. Given the variations in fi ndings across studies, further resting-state neurophysiology research and correlations with clinical symptoms are essential to understanding how speci fi c oscillatory patterns in the STN and pallidum relate to depression in PD. Additionally, studies with larger sample sizes and unbiased, comprehensive analyses across all frequency bands beyond only theta/alpha are needed.

Our retrospective study used brief, intraoperative neural recordings acquired during DBS implantation surgery in the resting, awake, offmedication state as a measure of spontaneous neural activity. Resting-state intraoperative recordings offer advantages in protocol simplicity (enabling a larger cohort of patients) and a higher sampling frequency than implanted DBS devices (enabling study of a broader range of oscillatory frequencies). Our fi ndings should be interpreted with caution, given that these brief recordings do not capture longitudinal changes in neural activity that may be relevant to a chronic, fl uctuating syndrome like depression. Our recordings also may have been affected by use of psychiatric medications, surgery-related stress, and whether eyes were open or closed, and recordings were only performed in the off-levodopa state. Additionally, our study includes a limited single-center cohort with relatively few patients with clinically elevated depression symptoms. These limitations underscore the need for validation of our fi ndings in prospective, multicenter studies involving chronic neural recordings to capture fl uctuations and other sources of variability. Additionally, by de fi nition, these resting-state recordings are not speci fi c to emotional, cognitive, or reward processing that may be relevant to depression pathophysiology. Future studies, like previous ones in the STN, should explore the role of pallidal neural activity in task-based paradigms to complement our resting-state recordings.

Our recordings were limited to sampling neural activity where the DBS electrodes were implanted clinically, mainly clustered around the middle and posterior regions of the pallidum, which is classically de fi ned as the sensorimotor region 86 . However, functional subregions of the pallidum have not been well de fi ned, and increasing evidence has revealed functional integration and topographical overlap across sensorimotor, associative, and limbic basal ganglia networks in nonhuman primate studies 87 -89 , human behavioral and neuroimaging studies 88,90,91 , and computational models 92,93 . The current study focuses on neural activity across the pallidum, but future studies will investigate the localization of candidate biomarkers in larger cohorts.

Ourintraoperative LFP neural recordings and the preoperative clinical rating scale scores represent only a single snapshot in time. The BDI-II, although an established screening and evaluation scale for depression in PD 26 , involves self-report, assesses symptoms only over the previous two weeks, and is not as comprehensive as a full diagnostic interview. Additionally, the BDI-II does not capture acute, momentary fl uctuations in depression symptoms, but rather assesses symptoms only over the previous two weeks, so we urge cautious interpretation of our results before further longitudinal validation. However, our goal was to use data that is routinely and ef fi ciently collected as part of the preoperative DBS assessments at our centers and others, which could be an asset for reproducibility and scalability. It is also important to note that there was a time delay between the preoperative depression assessment and the intraoperative neural recordings, which means that the BDI-II scores may not accurately re fl ect the depression severity at the time of surgery. Notably, we controlled for this

potential confound in our GLM analysis and found it did not signi fi cantly affect our main fi ndings.

Wealsocontrolled for anxiety and apathy in our GLM analysis, but it is often challenging to disentangle these comorbidities from depression 70 . Our current sample size was too small to differentiate various subtypes and symptom combinations, but future research will address potential biomarkers related to anxiety, apathy, and depression in larger cohorts. Finally, the present cohort is predominantly limited to those with mild to moderate depression, as more severe and untreated psychiatric disorders are typical exclusion criteria from DBS candidacy; however, we still found that 26% of patients had clinically elevated depression symptoms despite the more limited range in depression severity.

DBS therapy is effective for reducing motor symptoms of PD, but effects on nonmotor symptoms like depression are not well understood and are often overlooked. Biomarkers speci fi c to depression and other psychiatric symptoms could eventually enable more data-driven approaches to guide DBS therapy to reduce nonmotor symptoms while maintaining motor bene fi ts. Our study used acute, intraoperative, resting-state neural recordings for initial discovery of putative pallidal biomarkers of depression in PD, which enabled recordings from a large cohort of patients with high spatiotemporal precision. However, the advent of new clinical DBS devices capable of chronic neural recordings could provide additional insight into longitudinal neural activity and depression symptoms in the naturalistic homeenvironment, as demonstrated in a recent study focused on anxiety in PD 94 . Chronic recordings will be critical to study the effect of therapeutic interventions (i.e., medications or DBS) on candidate biomarkers of depression, determine whether modulation of neural activity predicts clinical outcomes, and de fi ne viable protocols for detecting biomarkers for clinical translation. Longitudinal studies could also potentially uncover new biomarkers of psychiatric symptoms not available in acute intraoperative settings, such as circadian patterns (shown in PD 95 and obsessivecompulsive disorder 96 ), medication-related fl uctuations in neural activity and symptoms, and long-term response to DBS.

Identifying robust biomarkers of psychiatric symptoms in PD could also potentially enable more targeted DBS paradigms to alleviate those symptoms. Promising research has emerged in this area, showing lowfrequency(10 Hz -in the alpha band) stimulation in the STN may modulate emotional processing, with potentially a more pronounced effect in PD patients with depression 23,97 . Although these studies focused on the alpha band, stimulation frequencies and patterns could theoretically be designed to enhance or suppress oscillatory activity in speci fi c frequencies (e.g., pallidal beta in the present study) 98 . However, improved knowledge of the anatomical speci fi city and the networks associated with pathophysiological neural activity and effects of DBS on behavior will be increasingly important for developing a fundamental understanding of depression in PD and moving toward clinical translation.

Wepresent the fi rst study investigating resting-state neural activity in the pallidum associated with depression in PD. The results indicate that beta power (particularly high beta power) may be a marker for differentiating between PD patients with versus without preoperative depression and a marker of depression severity, with higher beta power associated with worse depression symptoms. Notably, the relationship between beta power and depression symptoms was robust even after controlling for other demographic, clinical, pharmacological, and neurophysiological variables. These fi ndings provide new insight into the potential role of the pallidum in depression in PD and broaden the view of beta power as a potential marker of psychiatric symptoms.

## Methods

## Cohort and clinical assessment

Patients in this study included individuals who underwent awake pallidal DBSimplantationsurgery for the treatment of PDand intraoperative neural recordings at the University of Florida Norman Fixel Institute for Neurological Diseases from January 2021 to December 2022. The study was carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients listed in our institutional database provided informed consent for research participation (Institutional Review Board 202202094).

Exclusion criteria included: (1) absence of high-quality LFP recording; (2) missing preoperative neuropsychology evaluation and/or BDI-II score; (3) secondary movement disorder diagnosis (e.g., essential tremor); (4) neuropsychology evaluation closest to DBS surgery performed more than 6 months before surgery; (5) previous DBS surgery before neuropsychology assessment and/or LFP recordings (e.g., for patients who underwent bilateral staged DBS implantation, LFP recordings and preoperative assessment from only the fi rst side surgery were included to exclude any effects of prior surgery or stimulation).

As part of the standard pre-DBS neuropsychology evaluation at our center, preoperative baseline depressive symptoms were assessed using the Beck Depression Inventory, 2nd edition (BDI-II) (Beck et al.). According to established thresholds for differentiating depression diagnosis using the BDI-II 26 , patients were categorized as having PD with depression (BDI-II score ≥ 14) or PD without depression (BDI-II score &lt;14). The Apathy Scale (AS) and State-Trait Anxiety Index (STAI) Trait scores were also analyzed to control for other psychiatric symptoms. Preoperative baseline motor symptom severity was also assessed with the Uni fi ed Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale Part III (UPDRS-III).

A total of N = 95 patients underwent pallidal DBS surgery and intraoperative LFP recordings between January 2021 and December 2022. A subset of N = 17 patients had a previous DBS implantation and were excluded, and N = 14 patients were excluded due to the poor quality of recordings. Clinical evaluation data were absent for N = 9 patients or conducted more than 6 months before surgery for N = 5 patients. After enforcing exclusion criteria, a total of 50 patients were included in this study.

## Deep brain stimulation surgery

Following the conventional clinical practice of the UF surgical team, a quadripolar or directional DBS electrode was implanted while the patient was awake, targeted to the posterolateral GPi (lead model 3387 or B33015, Medtronic, USA). Each patient underwent a preoperative multisequence MRI scan that included FLAIR ( fl uid-attenuated inversion recovery), FGATIR (rapid grey matter acquisition T1 inversion recovery) 99 , and volumetric gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted sequences. A digitized Schaltenbrand -Wahrenatlas was overlaid on the imaging and warped to produce a patient-speci fi c atlas match. A stereotactic computed tomography (CT) scan was acquired while the patient was wearing a Cosman-Roberts-Wells stereotactic frame. After imageregistration between the CT and MRI scan, the volumetric images and atlas were used to create an electrode placement trajectory, which aimed to optimize the lead location within the target structure while avoiding vasculature and the ventricles.

Intraoperative neurophysiological testing, including microelectrode recordings and stimulation, was carried out to optimize DBS lead placement. After implantation, the DBS lead was connected to an external system (Neuro Omega, Alpha Omega, Israel) to acquire resting-state LFP recordings from each electrode on the DBS lead (further details in the following section). To limit the potential effects of stimulation on neural activity, the resting-state LFP recordings were acquired before performing any macrostimulation from the DBS leads.

Pre- and postoperative imaging was then used to verify the fi nal lead locations using methods reported previously 100 . In each patient, rigid registration was used to align the postoperative CT to the preoperative T1weighted MRI. The lead was then localized using the artifact in the postoperative CT. To compare across patients in a common atlas space, the MNI PD25 atlas 101 was nonlinearly registered using the SyN algorithm in ANTs (http://stnava.github.io/ANTs/) software 102 . The nonlinear transformations were then applied to the lead localizations to visualize the contact locations relative to anatomical nuclei. One patient was excluded from the contact location visualization during quality control procedures due to unsatisfactory registration to the atlas.

Fig. 3 | Local fi eld potential (LFP) processing pipeline in an example patient. A -D show the processing for contact 1 recordings as an example. E , F show all four contacts. A Raw and Butterworth fi ltered LFP recordings (30 s). B Power spectral density (PSD) computed using Welch ' s method. A peak detection algorithm was used to identify noise peaks for removal (marked in transparent bands). C The FOOOF algorithm 103 (blue) and a 2nd order exponential (pink) was fi t to the peak-

## Neural recordings and signal processing

Intraoperative LFP recordings (60 s) of spontaneous neural activity with the patient awake, at rest, and off-levodopa (but potentially on-antidepressants or other psychiatric medications) were acquired from all contacts on the DBS lead in a monopolar con fi guration at a high sampling rate (22 kHz; Neuro Omega system, Alpha) and referenced to a scalp electrode.

The monopolar LFP recordings then underwent extensive preprocessing and quality control through a pipeline illustrated in Fig. 3, showing all processing steps in an example patient for a recording from a single contact (Fig. 3A -D) and the raw PSD (Fig. 3E) and fully processed PSD (Fig. 3F). In each patient ' s recordings, the fi rst 30-second period free of noise/artifacts across all contacts was selected for subsequent analysis. The LFPs from the selected period were then Butterworth fi ltered (5th order; band-pass 1 -500 Hz) to remove low-frequency drift and high-frequency noise (Fig. 3A). Then, the power spectral density (PSD) from 1 -500 Hz was computed using Welch ' s method (SciPy welch: 1-second Hann window, 0.5-s overlap) (Fig. 3B). To be able to compare with 4-contact cylindrical leads, a ' ring mode ' PSD on the middle two contact levels (C1 and C2) of 8-contact directional leads was obtained by averaging the PSD across segments on each level. To identify any residual peaks in the PSD due to line noise (60 Hz and harmonics) or other intraoperative environment noise, a standard peak- fi nding algorithm (SciPy fi ndpeaks: peaks occurring at ≥ 40 Hz with prominence = 0.5) was implemented (Fig. 3C). Noise peaks that were detected in all

fi ltered PSD to reduce variability in offset and slope and enable direct comparisons across patients. D The normalization curves from ( C ) were subtracted from the PSD to obtain a normalized PSD. E RawPSDcurvesforallcontacts. F Final processed and normalized PSD curves for all contacts and the average PSD curve across all contacts (black).

contacts were extracted, measured for width (at 75% of relative height), and notch fi ltered for removal. All peaks marked for removal occurred at ≥ 60 Hz and were veri fi ed visually for quality control. No peaks required manual correction.

Next, the PSD was normalized to account for variability in PSD curve offset and slope and enable direct comparisons across patients using established methods (Fig. 3C). The Fitting Oscillations &amp; One Over F (FOOOF) algorithm 103 was used to fi t an exponential to the PSD from 1 -100 Hz (the aperiodic 1/frequency portion of the PSD curve). A secondorder exponential was fi t to higher frequencies from 100 -500 Hz. All exponential fi ts were visually inspected to verify accuracy (none required manual correction or removal), and the FOOOF R 2 values indicated accurate exponential fi ts to the PSD curves (mean, SD [range]: 0.97, 0.015 [0.93 -0.99]). The FOOOFexponentialandsecond-orderexponentialswere then subtracted from the original PSD to obtain a normalized PSD (Fig. 3D). The raw and fi nal processed PSDs are presented in Fig. 3E, F, showing that all noise peaks were removed and the normalization successfully removedthe PSDoffsetand. slope and did not affect the rank order of PSD across contacts.

The normalized PSD was then averaged over prede fi ned frequency bands and across all contacts: delta (1 -4 Hz), theta (4 -8 Hz), alpha (8 -12 Hz), beta (13 -30 Hz) [separated into low beta (13 -20 Hz) and high beta (20 -30 Hz)], gamma (30 -100 Hz) [separated into low gamma (30 -50 Hz) and high gamma (50 -100 Hz)], and high-frequency oscillations

(HFO) (200 -400 Hz) (Fig. 3F). For each patient, the slope and intercept of the FOOOF exponential were also extracted for each contact and then averaged across all contacts.

To con fi rm that our results using monopolar recordings were not affected by noise or cortical activity that may have been recorded in our scalp corkscrew reference electrode, we also analyzed the recordings after bipolar referencing between the cylindrical electrodes C0 and C3 to enable consistent analysis across quadripolar and 8-contact directional leads. After subtracting the LFP recordings from C0 and C3, the same signal processing methods were used as described above.

## Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were conducted to compare clinical variables for PD patients with depression (BDI-II ≥ 14) versus those without depression (BDI-II &lt; 14). Unpaired, two-tailed t-tests were used for continuous variables and Fischer ' s exact tests were used for discrete variables to compare the distributions across groups. For all analyses, p &lt; 0.05 was used as the threshold for statistical signi fi cance.

Univariate analyses using unpaired, two-tailed t-tests were then performed to determine if neural activity in the de fi ned frequency bands differed between PD patients with versus without depression. The frequency bands that signi fi cantly differed between PD patients with versus without depression were then further analyzed with Pearson correlations to determine if neural activity in those bands was also correlated with depression severity (BDI-II scores). For both series of t-tests and Pearson correlations, false discovery rate (FDR) via the Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to correct for multiple comparisons (family-wise error rate α = 0.05). Both raw and FDR-corrected p -values are reported.

Univariate analyses to assess the relationship between depression in PD and neural activity did not account for other demographic and clinical variables that may play a role in depression or may be associated with neural activity. A multivariate generalized linear model (GLM) was generated to evaluate the relationship between neural power in the above-de fi ned frequency bands and depression severity (BDI-II scores) while controlling for demographics (age, sex, months between BDI-II evaluation and intraoperative LFP recordings), recording variables [hemisphere of LFP recordings, normalization curve parameters (FOOOF exponent/slope and offset/ intercept)], PD severity and treatment variables [disease duration, UPDRS motor scores both on and off levodopa medication, levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD)], severity of other psychiatric symptoms [apathy (AS scores) and anxiety (STAI-Trait scores)], and psychiatric medication use (antidepressants, benzodiazepines, and non-benzodiazepine hypnotics). TheAkaikeInformationCriterion (AIC) 104 wasusedtocomparetherelative predictive performance of GLMs.

## Data availability

The data generated in this study are provided in the Source Data fi le. The raw(identi fi able) data are protected and are not available due to data privacy laws. Reasonable requests for additional information can be directed to, and will be ful fi lled by, the corresponding author. Note that these data are part of ongoing research studies. Code generated in this study for data processing and analysis is available at https://github.com/karajohnson/RestLFP-PDDepression.

Received: 3 February 2025; Accepted: 7 January 2026;

## Table 1

| 0                                             | 1                                                                  | 2                                                                | 3                                                                 | 4                   |
|:----------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------|
| Number of patients                            | 50                                                                 | 13 (26.0%)                                                       | 37 (74.0%)                                                        | -                   |
| Sex                                           | Male: 33 (66.0%)                                                   | Male: 11 (84.6%)                                                 | Male: 22 (59.5%)                                                  | p * = 0.17          |
| Age (years)                                   | 66.32 (8.34, 50 - 81)                                              | 63.46 (9.28, 50 - 80)                                            | 67.32 (7.88, 50 - 81)                                             | t = - 1.45 p = 0.15 |
| Disease duration (years)                      | 10.50 (5.06, 2 - 23)                                               | 12.62 (5.19, 6 - 23)                                             | 9.76 (4.87, 2 - 21)                                               | t = 1.79 p = 0.080  |
| Recording hemisphere                          | Left: 28 (56.0%)                                                   | Left: 7 (53.9%)                                                  | Left: 21 (56.8%)                                                  | p * = 1.0           |
| Evaluation time point (months before surgery) | 4.1 (1.40, 1 - 6)                                                  | 4.39 (1.39, 1 - 6)                                               | 4.00 (1.41, 1 - 6)                                                | t = 0.85 p = 0.40   |
| BDI-II                                        | 11.06 (8.14, 2 - 41)                                               | 22.38 (7.23, 14 - 41)                                            | 7.08 (3.17, 2 - 13)                                               | t = 10.45 p < 0.001 |
| AS                                            | N = 48 11.56 (6.00, 0 - 24)                                        | N = 13 15.07 (5.74, 4 - 24)                                      | N = 35 10.26 (5.63, 0 - 22)                                       | t = 2.62 p = 0.012  |
| STAI-trait                                    | N = 47 36.83 (10.43, 20 - 67)                                      | N = 13 47.38 (11.40, 20 - 67)                                    | N = 34 32.79 (6.61, 21 - 49)                                      | t = 5.48 p < 0.001  |
| Antidepressant use                            | 25 (50.0%)                                                         | 8 (61.5%)                                                        | 17 (45.6%)                                                        | p * = 0.52          |
| Benzodiazepine use                            | 20 (40.0%)                                                         | 6 (42.9%)                                                        | 14 (37.8%)                                                        | p * = 0.74          |
| Non-benzodiazepine hypnotic use               | 22 (44.0%)                                                         | 8 (61.5%)                                                        | 14 (37.8%)                                                        | p * = 0.20          |
| UPDRS-III (off levodopa)                      | N = 49 38.53 (13.66, 10 - 72)                                      | N = 13 34.62 (13.33, 10 - 56)                                    | N = 36 39.94 (13.68, 19 - 72)                                     | t = - 1.21 p = 0.23 |
| UPDRS-III (on levodopa)                       | N = 49 23.45 (12.09, 4 - 62)                                       | N = 13 21.77 (11.5, 4 - 44)                                      | N = 36 24.06 (12.39, 8 - 62)                                      | t = - 0.58 p = 0.57 |
| Motor subtype 105                             | N = 40 PIGD: 24 (60.0%) Tremor: 10 (25.0%) Intermediate: 6 (15.0%) | N = 11 PIGD: 4 (36.4%) Tremor: 4 (36.4%) Intermediate: 3 (27.2%) | N = 29 PIGD: 20 (69.0%) Tremor: 6 (20.7%) Intermediate: 3 (10.3%) | p * = 0.140         |
| Levodopa equivalent daily dose (mg/day)       | 1110.66(555.59,60 - 2275)                                          | 1159.77(591.04,60 - 2275)                                        | 1093.41 (550.03, 75 - 2000)                                       | t = 0.37 p = 0.72   |