## Introduction

Basal ganglia disorders such as Parkinson ' s disease (PD), essential tremor (ET) and  atypical parkinsonian  syndromes  (APS)  are of increasing relevance to the society due to an ageing population [1,2]. PD is  the  second-most common neurodegenerative disease with a prevalence of over 22,000 patients in Sweden and entails significant societal costs [3]. Symptom onset in PD seldom occurs before the age of 50 and the incidence increases with age [1]. The diagnosis is made clinically by patient interview and physical examination, no single technical examination  can  currently  replace  the  doctor ' s  assessment.  APS  include multisystem atrophy (MSA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal degeneration (CBD). Vascular parkinsonism (VP) is

## A B S T R A C T

Introduction: Although  transcranial  sonography  (TCS)  assessing  hyperechogenic  substantia  nigra  (SN + )  as biomarker for Parkinson s disease (PD) has been introduced elsewhere, the clinical relevance and accuracy in a Swedish population is still unknown.

Methods: This  retrospective  single-center  study  included  74  patients  with  predominantly  early-stage  parkinsonism at first visit who had been examined by TCS from 2013 to 2017 to determine the SN + biomarker status in relation to PD, atypical parkinsonian disorders (APS), essential tremor (ET) and vascular/secondary/ unspecified parkinsonism, with the aim of long-term follow-up to confirm the clinical diagnosis. The cut-off value for SN + was regarded as the 90 % percentile of SN echogenicity in a local healthy cohort (here, 0.23 cm 2 ).

Results: In 2024, the mean follow-up time was 95 months. Three patients (4 %) without transcranial bone were excluded. SN + was found in 38/51 patients with finally diagnosed PD and 4/20 patients with other final clinical diagnoses (p &lt; 0.001). Sensitivity was moderate (75 %) whereas specificity and the positive predictive value were higher (80 % and 90 %, respectively). SN area measurements (most abnormal side) were significantly different in PD-patients compared to non-PD patients (n = 63; 0.28 ± 0.09 [95 % CI: 0.25 -0.30] cm 2 vs. 0.23 ± 0.10 [0.18 -0.29] cm 2 , p 0.035).

Conclusion: After a follow-up of up to 8 years, to maximize diagnostic certainty, our findings support the use of TCS as a valuable add-on tool in PD diagnostics in a Swedish patient population, already in the early stage of disease but not for screening.

regarded as a secondary parkinsonian syndrome. In recent years, nuclear medicine methods using SPECT or PET have been applied to supplement clinical diagnostics, but they are limited by cost and availability and cannot  always  reliably  differentiate  between  different  parkinsonian syndromes.

Transcranial  sonography  (TCS)  is  a  non-invasive,  cheap,  fast  and easily  applicable but partially  operator-dependent imaging technique that could be used to support a PD diagnosis and to distinguish PD from APS [4,5] and ET. There are no known side effects of TCS. Around 80 % of patients with idiopathic PD but only about 10 % of a healthy population show a markedly increased echogenicity (hyperechogenicity) of substantia  nigra  (SN)  when  examined  by  TCS  [6],  probably  due  to pathological iron accumulation [7]. Several previous studies in a Central

* Corresponding author at: Cognitive Disorder Research Unit, Dept. of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. ¨ O. Skogar), uwe.walter@med.uni-

E-mail addresses: markus.stiehm@med.lu.se (M. Stiehm), christer.f.nilsson@skane.se (C. Nilsson), orjan.skogar@med.lu.se ( rostock.de (U. Walter).

## [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prdoa.2025.100411](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prdoa.2025.100411)

Received 21 July 2025; Received in revised form 3 December 2025; Accepted 4 December 2025

## Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

## Clinical Parkinsonism &amp; Related Disorders

[journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/clinical-parkinsonism-and-related-disorders](https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/clinical-parkinsonism-and-related-disorders)

Inclusion of patients with suspected examined by TCS between years 2013-

European population indicate that SN hyperechogenicity (SN + ) itself is a rather stable biomarker regardless of how long the patient has suffered from PD [8]. Some studies show that SN + status could have added value in the diagnosis of PD, especially in younger patients, even before the first motor symptoms appear [9]. SN is measured by semi-quantitative visual  assessment  and  planimetric  area  measurement  ipsilaterally  by transtemporal B-mode ultrasound if there is a good or satisfactory bone window [10]. Moderate SN + refers to planimetric areas larger than 75 %  percentile  in  adult  population  without  neurological  disorders, whereas marked SN + refers to areas larger than 90 % percentile [4]. The risk of clinically asymptomatic individuals over the age of 50 developing PD is up to 20 times higher in the presence of SN + [11,12]. Previously, a significant correlation between FDG-PET  and  TCS findings was demonstrated in the differentiation of Parkinson ' s disease [13]. Studies with a follow-up period of up to 5 years showed that TCS is particularly beneficial  in  the  early  stages  of  PD,  when  patients  only  have  mild extrapyramidal  symptoms.  In  cases  where  APS  was  suspected,  the studies were smaller and the follow-up period was significantly shorter, at 12 to 17 months [12,14 -16]. Since 2013, the European neurological societies  have  included  TCS  for  the  differential  diagnosis  of  PD,  and optionally  for  screening  persons  at  risk  of  developing  PD  (level  A recommendation)  [17,18].  The  available  studies  were  performed  in Central  European,  East  Asian  and  South  American  populations  with relatively short follow-up time (for PD: range 0 -60 months; for APS: 0 -17 months). So far, however, there are no trials on the use of TCS in a Scandinavian population.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic value of the TCS finding SN + in newly diagnosed patients with early-stage parkinsonism with regard to the final diagnosis (PD vs. non-PD, including APS, secondary/vascular parkinsonism, or ET) after long-term follow-up (FU) at our tertiary center in southern Sweden.

## 2. Material &amp; methods

## 2.1. Patients

From  2013,  we  started  offering  all  newly  referred  and  selected chronic patients with parkinsonism a TCS examination, as part of our routine clinical diagnostic workup. From 2015, we achieved a sustained high degree of patient participation.

The present study was conducted as a retrospective cohort study, see Fig.  1.  New  patients with parkinsonism who presented to our center before 2017 who have been examined by TCS during 2013 to 2017 (nonconsecutive recruitment) could be included (n = 74). Patients with dementia that was already present at their first visit were not included. The duration of parkinsonian symptoms was equal with or less than five years at clinical examination in all study participants regardless of when they  presented  to  our  center.  Among  these,  only  three  patients  with unsatisfactory bone window were excluded. All included patients were assessed clinically by a specialist in neurology with extensive experience in movement disorders to establish clinical diagnosis.

## 2.2. Transcranial sonography (TCS)

TCS was performed transtemporally by an at that time commonly available high-resolution ultrasonic system (iU22; Philips, Eindhoven, The  Netherlands).  The  following  brain  structures  were  depicted  and assessed:  substantia  nigra  and  the  ventricular  system,  especially  the width of 3rd ventricle. For this, a 2- to 3-MHz ultrasound transducer was used for transtemporal axial examination of midbrain plane and thalamus plane in B-mode [4,19]. Dynamic range was set at 45 -55 dB, depth at 14 -16 cm so that the contralateral skull bone was visible. Other settings were adjusted as needed, with optional use of harmonic imaging as previously described [19]. After manually encircling the echogenic area of the SN with the cursor, the area was automatically calculated by the

Fig. 1. Flow chart regarding criteria for inclusion and exclusion of study participants.

ultrasound  device  without  the  use  of  external  software.  Ultrasound findings were recorded digitally as images (see bonus figures A and B in the supplementary material) and short video loops on the machine, as summary report (text), and as measurement data collection in a regional clinical  image  database.  All  other  study  data  and  the  measurements were saved in an external research database.  For various ultrasound systems of different manufacturers, the cut-off values defining SN + have been established by several research groups and clinical units [20]. In the  present  study,  the  first  author  is  an  experienced,  board-certified neurosonologist. In an initial local validation study a group of voluntary healthy probands (n = 40; four without bone window; mean age: 44 ± 14  (mean ± SD,  range,  25 -71  years);  sex:  27  women;  mean  SN echogenic  area  at  left  side:  0.133 ± 0.051  cm 2 ,  right  side:  0.148 ± 0.073 cm 2 ) were investigated on both sides by TCS planimetric measurements. In this reference population the measures corresponded well with previously reported data obtained with the same type of ultrasound system in a larger cohort of 105 healthy persons [21], and the 90 % percentile of SN echogenicity was determined at 0.23 cm 2 . Therefore, values &gt; 0.23 cm 2 were defined as marked SN + in our population.

## 2.3. Clinical follow-up and final diagnoses of parkinsonian patients

The final clinical diagnosis was extracted from each patient ' s medical records and confirmed by review of the medical records by a senior PD  specialist  with  long-standing  experience  in  movement  disorders independently from the TCS investigator, complicated or unclear cases were  discussed,  and  diagnoses  were  established  by  a  three  headed consensus group. The established MDS clinical diagnostic criteria for PD were applied [22]. The diagnosis could consider the results of dopaminergic  nuclear  medicine  examinations  if  performed  (SPECT  or 18 FDOPA-PET). There was no evidence in the patient records of diagnostic bias  or  interference  between  the  initial  TCS  findings  and  the  final diagnosis, as the diagnosis was not changed by the treating neurologists directly or within one year of the TCS examination in any patient, even when the TCS results were documented and available in the medical records. Furthermore, TCS was not performed either before the initial diagnosis or during the first visit to our center.

## 2.4. Statistics and ethics

Statistical  analyses  were  performed using IBM SPSS version 30.0. Numerical variables were tested by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test and categorical variables by the Chi 2 -test. The study was approved by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority (Dnr 2022 -06697-01).

## 3. Results

Seventy-four patients were recruited after being examined by TCS at our center between years 2013 -2017. The TCS data of 71 patients could be analyzed, as three patients had no sufficient bone window for TCS. Of these,  51  were  finally  diagnosed  with  PD  and  20  with  non-PD  basal ganglia disorder (eight APS, two ET, seven with secondary/VP and three with unspecified parkinsonism). Thirty patients underwent additional dopamine transporter-imaging by SPECT and/or PET examination during FU (24 were abnormal). Duration of FU was in mean 95.3 ± 48.2 months (range 1 -217). Patients were 66 ± 10.0 (range 43 -88) years of age at the first visit and had a mean motor symptom duration of 18 months (range 4 -60). Time from 1st visit to TCS examination for the whole group was in median 8.0 months (range 1 -106), but for the 55 patients examined between 2015 -2017 it was in median 6.0 months (range  1 -87).  24  patients  died  and  17  patients  developed  dementia during FU. For summarized baseline characteristics, see Table 1.

There was a difference between the groups with regard to the SN + biomarker,  which  occurred  significantly  more  frequently  in  the  PD group (p &lt; 0.001), see Table 2. The descriptive statistics of the SN + findings related to a PD diagnosis are presented in table 3

Table 1

Baseline characteristics and diagnoses after follow-up. Abbreviations: Follow-Up (FU); Transcranial Sonography (TCS); Parkinson s disease (PD); Atypical Parkinsonism (APS); Essential Tremor (ET) .

| Variable                                                        | All (n = 71)   |
| Demographics                                                    |                |
| Mean age (range)                                                | 66 (43 - 88)   |
| Women/men                                                       | 27/44          |
| Time variables                                                  |                |
| Mean FU duration in months (range)                              | 95.3 (1 - 217) |
| Median symptom duration prior visit in months (range)           | 18 (4 - 60)    |
| Median time from 1st visit to TCS examination in months (range) | 8 (1 - 106)    |
| Medical                                                         |                |
| Change of diagnosis during FU, no. (%)                          | 37 (52)        |
| incl. change after consensus group meeting                      | 4 (6)          |
| PET and SPECT, no. (%) of which                                 | 30 (41)        |
| - pathological, no. (%)                                         | 24 (34)        |
| - SWEDD*, no.                                                   | 1              |
| Died during FU, no. (%)                                         | 24 (34)        |
| Dementia during FU, no. (%)                                     | 17 (24)        |
| Final diagnosis after FU, no. (%)                               |                |
| PD                                                              | 51 (72)        |
| APS                                                             | 8 (11)         |
| ET                                                              | 2 (3)          |
| Secondary incl. VP/unspecified parkinsonism                     | 7/3 (14)       |

* : Scans without evidence of dopaminerg deficit (SWEDD).

Table 2

Hyperechogenicity  of  substantia  nigra  vs.  final  diagnosis.  Abbreviations: hyperechogenicity of substantia nigra (SN + ); Parkinson s disease (PD).

|        |   PD (no.) |   Non-PD (no.) |   All (no.) | p       |
| SN +   |         38 |              4 |          42 | < 0.001 |
| Normal |         13 |             16 |          29 |         |
| Normal |         51 |             20 |          71 |         |

(supplementary material): SN + was found in 38/51 finally diagnosed PD-patients (75 % sensitivity, 95 % CI 60 -86 %) and 38/42 test-positive patients (SN + ) had a final PD-diagnosis (90 % positive predictive value, 95 % CI: 80 -96 %). The specificity was 80 % (56 -94 %), the accuracy 76 % (64 % -85 %) and the negative predictive value 55 % (42 % -67 %).

At FU, diagnosis had been changed in 52 % of cases, in either direction (any time-point after the first visit). For example, 5 (14 %) of 36 initially suspected PD cases had a final diagnosis of APS and eight of 16 patients  with  initial  suspected  secondary/unspecified  basal  ganglia disorder got a final diagnosis of PD. Two initially suspected PD cases were diagnosed with VP/secondary parkinsonism (out of in total seven with secondary/vascular parkinsonism) leaving only three patients with undefined  parkinsonism  after  FU,  see  table  4  in  the  supplementary material for details. In the subgroup of revised patients,  true PDpatients demonstrated SN + on TCS (vs.  non-PD-patients, p &lt; 0.001) which corresponds to a 77 % sensitivity (95 % CI 55 %-92 %), 80 % specificity (95 % CI 52 %-96 %) and 85 % PPV (95 % CI 67 %-94 %). When excluding the patients with longer delay between symptom debut and TCS over 60 months (n = 13) the results did not change substantially, we still found a significant difference between groups ( PD with SN + vs.  non-PD with SN + ; p 0.002) but lower values for sensitivity (68 %; 95 %CI 52 %-82 %), specificity (775 %; 95 % CI 50 %-93 %) and the positive predictive value (88 %; 95 % CI 74 %-94 %). Even when excluding all patients examined beyond 24 months from symptom onset, the smaller subgroup (n = 30) showed similar results: 13/21 PD patients were positive vs. 2/9 non-PD (p 0.046) which corresponds to 62 % sensitivity (95 % CI 38 %-82 %), 78 % specificity (95 % CI 40 %-97 %) and 87 % positive predictive value (95 % CI 65 %-96 %).

In addition, there was a clear difference in the subgroup of patients with dopamine scans:  PET/SPECT-positive PD patients showed the SN +fi nding, while only  PET/SPECT-positive patients without clinical PD showed this finding on TCS (p = 0.008); this corresponds to a

Largest SN area of most abnormal side

sensitivity of 67 % (95 % CI 38 -88 %), a specificity of 89 % (95 % CI 52 -100 %), and a PPV of 91 % (95 % CI 60 -99 %) in this subgroup. Altogether, 30 scans were recorded in 26 patients, with 24 scans being pathological, one being inconclusive, and the rest being normal. SWEDD was detected in one patient.

Quantitative measures of SN echogenic area were available in 63 patients. The average size of SN echogenic area in PD-patients tended to be  larger  on  each  side  as  compared  to  the  non-PD  patients  but  that finding was non-significant (left side: 0.24 ± 0.11 [95 % CI: 0.20 -0.27] cm 2 vs. 0.20 ± 0.05 [0.17 -0.23] cm 2 , p 0.156; right side: 0.26 ± 0.09 [0.23 -0.29] cm 2 vs. 0.21 ± 0.12 [0.13 -0.29] cm 2 , p 0.123). The largest size of SN echogenic area of either left or right side was significantly different in PD-patients compared to non-PD patients (n = 63; 0.28 ± 0.09  [95  %  CI:  0.25 -0.30]  cm 2 vs.  0.23 ± 0.10  [0.18 -0.29]  cm 2 ,  p 0.035), see Fig. 2. No significant difference of the 3rd ventricle widths was found between 46 PD-patients (0.44 ± 0.19 [95 % CI: 0.38 -0.49] cm) and 17 non-PD-patients (0.49 ± 0.27 [95 % CI: 0.35 -0.64] cm; p 0.52)  nor  between  PD  and  APS  patients  (0.47 ± 0.28  [95  %  CI: 0.24 -0.71] cm; n = 8; p 0.91).

## 4. Discussion

Although TCS of the SN echo signals has been studied since many years and has been recommended as a diagnostic tool in European und National clinical guidelines on PD [17,18], it is worth re-examining this methodology as it is still limited in its use in Scandinavian countries, e.g. in  Sweden.  This  is  partly  due  to  historical-practical  reasons  (regular ultrasound  training  is  not  included  in  the  neurology  specialization), partly due to insufficient study data from other parts of the world and partly due to lack of data from a Scandinavian cohort. Until now, there are no published data on the diagnostic value of SN + as biomarker for PD  versus  other  Parkinsonian  syndromes  neither  in  a  Swedish  nor Scandinavian population.

After establishing cut off values in a healthy cohort, the results of the present study support the use of TCS for diagnosing PD. We examined the correlation between TCS findings and the finally established clinical diagnosis after a reasonably long FU period. After almost 8 years, we found a rather limited sensitivity (75 %) compared to some previous studies,  where  sensitivity  exceeded  80  %  [23,24],  but  found  good specificity (80 %) and an even higher PPV (90 %) with similar findings in specified subgroups including revised PD-patients, patients who have been examined by TCS early and those who went through PET/SPECT scans.  Our  findings  correspond  to  two  comprehensive meta -analyses: Pooled data from 15 original studies found 75 % sensitivity and 69 % specificity when comparing PD vs. APS [25], while a more recent meta -analysis  of  18  studies  with  quite  some  overlap  between  the  studies (almost the same original trials included, n = 14) demonstrated 77 %

Fig. 2. Boxplots of largest mean SN-size (cm 2 ) of both sides (the most abnormal side)  vs.  final  diagnosis  PD  or  Non-PD  (n = 63;  0.28 ± 0.09  [95  %  CI: 0.25 -0.30] cm 2 vs. 0.23 ± 0.10 [0.18 -0.29] cm 2 , p 0.035). *MWU-test.

sensitivity, 81 % specificity and 90 % PPV [24]. The most recent meta -analysis of the 9 most recent trials (with some overlap, n = 2) found a 85 % sensitivity and 71 % specificity, PPV was not reported [23].

The patient cohorts studied by TCS so far were predominantly from Central/Southern and Eastern Europe, South America, and East Asia. There  is  evidence  that  lighter  skin  pigmentation  is  associated  with elevated  SN  echogenicity  in  a  geographically  defined  population [26,27]. However, in a direct comparison using the same ultrasound device, the echogenicity of SN and the frequency of SN + were similar in Central European and East Asian populations [28]. There are differences mainly in the frequency of a sufficient transcranial bone window between  Caucasian  and  Asian  subjects,  with  the  latter  having  a  lower percentage of adequate transcranial bone windows, e.g., 25 % dropouts in a larger Chinese cohort, but SN positivity in TCS could still effectively differentiate PD from ET, PSP, and MSA in this Chinese population [29]. In patients with MSA, PSP and ET, SN is mostly normal that means that SN + is found in only 10 % of cases or less [4,13,17,18,25,30]. On the other hand, there is some evidence that the SN + feature cannot distinguish between PD and CBD patients due to almost the same amount of positive findings in both groups [18,24,31]. Three recent meta -analyses concluded that SN + as sonological biomarker can differentiate between PD and APS with a sensitivity of 75 -85 % and a specificity of 70 -81 % [23 -25].

To improve the differential diagnosis of PD vs. APS using TCS, the sonographic  assessment  also  of  lenticular  nucleus  has  been  recommended [4,18].  By  including  other  findings  on  TCS,  e.g.  the  hyperechogenicity of basal ganglia and an increased third-ventricle width, characteristic  patterns  of  TCS  correspond  to  different  Parkinsonian syndromes (MSA, PSP, CBD) facilitating differential diagnostics [4,16,18]. Lenticular nucleus hyperechogenicity is not only indicative of APS, but also a typical finding in Wilson's disease or in distinct iron storage diseases [7,32 -34]. TCS of lenticular nucleus, however, requires special training of the examiner [18] and was not part of the protocol of the present study. It should be noted that SN + occurs more frequently in copper and iron storage diseases, which supports the recommendation of a  combined  assessment  of  SN,  basal  ganglia,  and  ventricles  for  the purpose of differential diagnosis [7,34,35]. Nowadays, in our labs the combined assessment of SN, lenticular nucleus and 3rd ventricle on TCS is performed for the discrimination of parkinsonian disorders. Still, for distinct diagnostic questions (e.g. the differentiation between essential tremor and PD), the assessment of SN is sufficient [18].

The strength of the present study includes the long FU-time of 7.9 years in a Swedish population that to our knowledge has not yet has been  investigated.  Although  definite  diagnosis  in  neurodegenerative disorders  only  can  be  obtained  by  neuropathological  assessment  on autopsy, a long FU period increases the likelihood for correct clinicopathological correlation. In addition, the clinical diagnoses were independently validated  by  an  experienced  movement  disorder  specialist unaware of the SN + biomarker status.

However, there are limitations to the present study design: small sample size, retrospective design and possible selection bias with not all parkinsonism patients included from initial diagnostic evaluation are issues  to  be  considered.  There  was  no  formal  blinding  regarding  the initially suspected diagnoses at the time when TCS investigations were performed. However, the considerable number of patients with change of the diagnosis during follow-up should have reduced the potential bias caused by initial unblinding of the sonographer.

The rather high overall rate of diagnostic revisions (52 %) in our study can be explained by the fact that patients with nonspecific early parkinsonism who did not meet the clinical MDS society criteria for PD were included initially. The previously reported error rates of approximately 10 -20 % for diagnoses in movement disorder centres usually refer to patients who were originally diagnosed with PD. Looking only at the patients in our cohort who were originally diagnosed with PD (n = 36), the diagnostic error rate is within the reported range (n = 7; 19 %). The higher number of overall diagnostic revision (52 %) itself could

partially be explained by an initial use of the category unspecified MDS (ICD-10-codes: G25.9 or G23.9) in early parkinsonism patients not yet fulfilling the clinical criteria for PD. If one only counts the final PDpatients  who  got  initial  preliminary  diagnosis  ET  or ' unclear  syndrome/no  MDS ' and  view  8  patients  with  unspecified  parkinsonism suggestive for PD as initially suspected PD, the diagnostic revision rate after FU drops to 27 % of all true PD-patients.

The time gap between 1st visit and TCS examination (7.5 months in mean)  was  most  likely  not  of  importance  due  to  the  previously demonstrated stable SN status over time [8]. The SN echogenic sizes found here in PD patients are within the same range as reported recently by Chau et al., who applied the same ultrasound system [21]. The absolute differences between PD and non-PD patients regarding bilateral SN size were small, probably because the original validated cut-off value (0.23 cm 2 ) was meant to differentiate PD from healthy controls and not from other basal ganglia disorder. These study findings may be due to a heterogeneous control group (non-PD incl. 8 APS, 7 secondary/VP, 3 undefined  and  2  ET)  with  mixed  diagnoses  which  were  harder  to differentiate from PD by SN + only. It has been hypothesized from one earlier  study  by  Behnke  et  al.  that  a  mild  to  moderate  SN  hyperechogenicity is frequent in patients with unspecified APS [36].

We did not reach the high levels of sensitivity and specificity reported  in  some  previous  studies  [9],  which  is  probably  due  to  the assessment of SN only (instead of assessing also the lenticular nucleus), the rather small sample size, and a different patient selection. One might argue  that  a  second  TCS  examination  of  our  patients  could  have increased the diagnostic accuracy. Until now, digitized measurements of SN echo-intensity by computerized algorithm were not clearly superior to manual planimetric measurement according to internationally agreed recommendations  by  experienced  ultrasonic  experts  [10,37],  even  if some  previous  trials  have  postulated  increased  sensitivity  for  PD compared to healthy and individuals with Wilson's disease by using the recent TCS-MRI-fusion imaging technique [38]. The recently developed real-time TCS-MRI fusion imaging technique could potentially increase the detection rate of SN + and thereby improve the differentiation between PD and APS [38]. Moreover, planimetric measures and digitized echo-intensity  measures have  been proposed to  capture different  pathologies causing SN + , which could explain why they may differ to some degree [39]. Therefore, an adequate reliability of the planimetric standard measures has been proposed being achievable by using strict protocols, standardized documentation and well-trained neurosonologists [40] which we strictly followed.

The TCS technique needs a sufficient degree of training before one is able using it on a regular basis [4]. Therefore, in the recent update of the German guideline on PD, the education requirements to be regarded as qualified TCS investigator in PD have been outlined [18], which could be worthwhile to adapt to the national guidelines in other European countries. Another issue is the dependence of TCS on sufficient temporal bone windows for insonation in patients or probands. Adequate bone window could be seen in studies at ≥ 90 % of patients/healthy probands, in the present study we assessed even 96 % of participants with satisfying bone window.

Considering the available neuroimaging techniques, TCS offers the advantages of non-invasiveness, easy repeatability, and less interference from  patient  movement.  Even  though  conventional  MRI  can  detect structural differences between PD and APS -such as the putaminal rim or hot cross bun sign in MSA or the hummingbird sign in PSP -these are generally only signs of a later stage of the disease and do not help to distinguish  between  patients  with  early-stage  or  mild  PD.  [41].  Presynaptic molecular imaging using SPECT does not allow differentiation between PD and APS at any stage of the disease [41,42]. Similar to SPECT, presynaptic 18 F-Dopa PET shows reduced tracer uptake in both PD and APS, without it being able to differentiate between the two [42]. Hellwig  et  al.  conducted  a  comparison  between  TCS  and  diagnostic molecular imaging (FDG-PET) in 36 patients, which showed a significant correlation between the FDG-PET and TCS findings in distinguishing between different types of Parkinsonian disorders [13]. The sensitivity/specificity for the diagnosis of APS using FDG-PET was 82 %/100 % and using TCS 82 %/85 %. The diagnostic accuracy did not differ significantly between the modalities in this study (p = 0.63) [13].

In conclusion, our findings in a Swedish cohort support the use of TCS as a valuable add-on tool for the diagnosis of PD in a group of patients  with  parkinsonism  at  a  tertiary  referral  center,  although  the overall need of achieving an reliable individual prediction may remain unmet by using TCS of SN as stand-alone test. However, TCS can be generally regarded as a non-invasive, cost-effective and complementary diagnostic method, provided that it is performed by a qualified investigator. The finding of SN + in a patient with suspected PD can mostly avoid the use of expensive nuclear medicine examinations, whereas a negative  result  does  not  rule  out  PD,  requiring  TCS  of  other  brain structures,  or  additional  diagnostic  workup  to  discriminate  PD  from other parkinsonian disorders. TCS of basal ganglia and especially prospective  head-to-head  studies  comparing  TCS  with  other  (nuclear medicine) diagnostic methods in a Swedish cohort would be of great interest. To implement TCS in clinical practice, it is crucial to keep a good  sonographer ' s  competence,  a  structured  examination  protocol including  documentation  and  to  limit  the  use  of  TCS  to  the  clinical condition of parkinsonism.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement

M. Stiehm: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Writing -original  draft, Visualization, Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. C.  Nilsson: Writing -review &amp; editing,  Visualization, Supervision,  Resources,  Methodology,  Conceptualization. ¨ O.  Skogar: Validation, Investigation. U. Walter: Writing -review &amp; editing, Supervision, Methodology, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

## Funding

This  work  was  supported  by  The  Husbands  Stoltz'  Foundation, Malm ¨ o and The Elsa Schmitz' Foundation, Lund.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements

We are grateful for research grants during the past years from Stiftelsen Margit och Kjell Stoltz fond f ¨ or bek ¨ ampande av Parkinsons sjukdom, Malm ¨ o and Elsa Schmitz ' Stiftelse f ¨ or neurologisk och neurokirurgisk forskning, Lund.

We would like to thank our experienced PD nurse Eva Berg for her support during the years. And -last but not least -we would like to thank all participating patients.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.prdoa.2025.100411.

## Table 1

| 0                                                               | 1              |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------|
| Demographics                                                    |                |
| Mean age (range)                                                | 66 (43 - 88)   |
| Women/men                                                       | 27/44          |
| Time variables                                                  |                |
| Mean FU duration in months (range)                              | 95.3 (1 - 217) |
| Median symptom duration prior visit in months (range)           | 18 (4 - 60)    |
| Median time from 1st visit to TCS examination in months (range) | 8 (1 - 106)    |
| Medical                                                         |                |
| Change of diagnosis during FU, no. (%)                          | 37 (52)        |
| incl. change after consensus group meeting                      | 4 (6)          |
| PET and SPECT, no. (%) of which                                 | 30 (41)        |
| - pathological, no. (%)                                         | 24 (34)        |
| - SWEDD*, no.                                                   | 1              |
| Died during FU, no. (%)                                         | 24 (34)        |
| Dementia during FU, no. (%)                                     | 17 (24)        |
| Final diagnosis after FU, no. (%)                               |                |
| PD                                                              | 51 (72)        |
| APS                                                             | 8 (11)         |
| ET                                                              | 2 (3)          |
| Secondary incl. VP/unspecified parkinsonism                     | 7/3 (14)       |

## Table 2

| 0      |   1 |   2 |   3 | 4       |
|:-------|----:|----:|----:|:--------|
| SN +   |  38 |   4 |  42 | < 0.001 |
| Normal |  13 |  16 |  29 |         |
| Normal |  51 |  20 |  71 |         |