
Published in partnership with the Parkinson ' s Foundation

Jeng-Lin Li 1,2 , Shu-Yi Huang 3 , Po-Yu Huang 4,5 , Ssu-Ju Fu 6,7 , Yu-Jung Tsao 6,8 , Wenying Chang 6,8 , Cheng-Li Hong 6 , Yu-Chien Hung 6 , Pei-Han Liu 4 , Liang-Chuan Lai 6 , Chin-Hsien Lin 2,9,10,11 , Wei-Chung Chiang 4,12 &amp; Chih-Chiang Chan 2,6

Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and mitophagy are functionally interconnected cellular processes, the defects of which are considered key driving forces behind the pathogenesis of Parkinson ' s disease (PD). UQCRC1, a core subunit of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III, is a recently identi fi ed familial PD gene whose pathogenic mutations result in OXPHOS stress. Given its importance, however, the role of UQCRC1 in idiopathic PD as well as mitophagy has not been investigated. In this study, we collected 19 datasets comprising postmortem substantia nigra from 150 cases of non-disease controls and 185 cases of PD or incidental Lewy body disease (iLBD), and the meta-analysis of the UQCRC1 mRNAlevel showed reduced expression in idiopathic PD, suggesting the potential of UQCRC1 as a biomarker. Leveraging the SH-SY5Y cells and fl y models, we showed that mitophagy was impaired upon UQCRC1 mutation or depletion. Notably, insuf fi ciency of PINK1 mRNAwasassociatedwithUQCRC1de fi ciency,andoverexpressionof Pink1 rescuedthelocomotion and mitophagy defects in the fl y models with neuronal loss of uqcrc1. Treatment with two PINK1 activators, kinetin and MTK458, resulted in similar protective effects in the fl y and cell models. Overall, weidenti fi ed OXPHOS stress led by de fi ciency of UQCRC1 as an etiology of mitophagy defects in PD and PINK1 as a therapeutic target for UQCRC1 -associated PD.

Parkinson ' s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder worldwide with increasing prevalence in the aging population 1 . PD is characterized by progressive bradykinesia, rigidity, tremor, and dopaminergic neuron loss in the substantia nigra (SN). Accumulating genetic studies have deepened our understanding of PD pathogenesis. However, common genetic variants account for only approximately 22% of PD risk 2 , with most PD cases being idiopathic without de fi nite genetic etiology. To date, treatments for PD have largely focused on symptomatic relief. Elucidating the underlying molecular mechanisms may provide new insights for the development of disease-modifying therapies for PD pathogenesis.

The molecular pathogenesis of PD is intricate and heterogeneous. Notably, a crucial factor contributing to PD is oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) stress resulting from the dysfunctions of the mitochondrial respiratory chain 3 . This is exempli fi ed by the neurotoxin 1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), whose metabolite disrupts the mitochondrial respiratory chain, leading to neuronal death and parkinsonism 4 . Genetic studies have further strengthened the role of OXPHOS dysfunction in PD pathogenesis. Mutations of several PDassociated genes have been shown to affect mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes. For instance, oligomerized mutant α -synuclein disrupts the

1 Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Jin-Shan Branch, New Taipei, Taiwan. 2 PhD Program in Translational Medicine, National Taiwan University and Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. 3 Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. 4 Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Life Sciences, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan. 5 School of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan. 6 Graduate Institute of Physiology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. 7 School of Medicine, Fu -Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan. 8 Department of Neurology, Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. 9 Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. 10 Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. 11 Department of Biomedical engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. 12 Cancer and Immunology Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan. e-mail: chlin@ntu.edu.tw;

[wchiang@nycu.edu.tw; chancc1@ntu.edu.tw](mailto:wchiang@nycu.edu.tw)

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-026-01262-6

## UQCRC1deficiencyimpairsmitophagyvia PINK1-dependent mechanisms in Parkinson ' s disease

respiratory chain complex I 5,6 ; the loss of CHCHD2 destabilizes complex IV 7 ; and the mutations of DJ-1 impair its ability to enhance the function of ATPsynthase of complex V 8 . Taken together, studies using these toxin and genetic models supported that OXPHOS distress is central to PD pathogenesis.

In addition to the OXPHOSstress, the impairment of mitophagy is also critically linked to PD pathogenesis 9 . Mitophagy is a critical mitochondrial quality control mechanism that removes dysfunctional or super fl uous mitochondria via autophagic sequestration. PINK1 and Parkin are two master enzymes responsible for the initiation of mitophagy. Upon mitochondrial stress, PINK1 kinase is stabilized and activated by autophosphorylation on the mitochondrial outer membrane, where it phosphorylates ubiquitin and Parkin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase. The phosphorylated Parkin in turn ubiquitinates mitochondrial outer membrane proteins, resulting in the recruitment of ubiquitin-binding autophagy receptors and ultimately the autophagic removal of damaged mitochondria 10 . Several PD etiologies have been proposed to impact mitophagy, including excessive α -synuclein and LRRK2 mutations 11 -13 . Recently, a proteomic study using human postmortem midbrains of PD revealed that de fi ciency of the respiratory chain complexes was correlated with reduced expression of mitochondrial quality control proteins 14 . Moreover, it has been reported that lysosomal function is impaired in cells with chronic OXPHOS de fi ciency 15 . In contrast, enhanced mitophagy was found in neurons upon OXPHOS stimulation 16 . These observations imply that OXPHOS activity plays a regulatory role in mitophagy, but the detailed mechanisms are not yet clear.

UQCRC1 , which encodes a core subunit of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III, is recently identi fi ed as a familial PD gene from a multicenter East Asian population 17 . The PD-associated missense variant p.Y314S leads to reduced oxygen consumption and ATP production rate 18 . Mice with UQCRC1 p.Y314S mutation exhibited dopaminergic neuronal loss and locomotor defects 18 , and similar phenotypes were observed in Drosophila with uqcrc1 depletion 19 . Thus far, UQCRC1 mutants are the only PD-associated genetic variants that encode a component of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Elucidating whether UQCRC1 de fi ciency impacts mitophagy may provide insights into the speci fi c mechanism by which the electron transport chain complex regulates mitophagy.

Here, we extended our study on the role of UQCRC1 from familial PD to idiopathic PD. We fi rst conducted a meta-analysis using open-source datasets and revealed that low levels of UQCRC1 are associated with idiopathic PD. Using both cell and fl y models, we demonstrated that mitophagy was impaired upon UQCRC1 mutation or depletion. Furthermore, we observed that UQCRC1-associated mitophagy impairment was accompanied by PINK1 reduction. Notably, enhancing PINK1 activity by PINK1 overexpression or treatments of PINK1 activators, such as kinetin and MTK458 20 , rescued the Parkinsonism-like defects in the UQCRC1 -associated PD models, suggesting that the augmentation of mitophagy is a potential therapeutic approach for PD.

## Results

## Meta-analysis revealed that UQCRC1 expression is reduced in idiopathic PD

To elucidate the expression level of UQCRC1 in idiopathic PD, we searched the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database with the keywords ' (Parkinson ' s disease) AND ' Homo sapiens ' [porgn:\_\_txid9606] AND (substantia nigra). ' We fi ltered the 327 results with the inclusion and exclusion criteria (Fig. S1), yielding a total of 19 datasets as summarized in Table S1 21 -32 . We then analyzed these datasets consisting of 150 cases of controls and 185 cases of PD or incidental Lewy body disease (iLBD) and found a reduction in UQCRC1 mRNA levels in the substantia nigra of PD patients. The estimated average log 2 -fold change of the UQCRC1 mRNA level was -0.2981 in PD substantia nigra compared to normal individuals based on the random-effects model (95% con fi dence interval (CI): -0.5204 to -0.0758, p =0.0086) (Fig. 1A). Namely, there was approximately a 20% decrease in UQCRC1 mRNAlevel in PD. To examine the accountability of the outcome, we checked the heterogeneity and publication bias among the included datasets. There was no noticeable heterogeneity according to the Q-test (Q(18) = 14.3105, p =0.7086, tau² = 0.00, I² =0.00%), and the publication bias was not noted according to the rank correlation or regression test ( p =0.1284and p =0.1736, respectively) (Fig. S2A). The results indicate that UQCRC1 mRNA level is reduced in idiopathic PD.

## Reduced UQCRC1 expressioninpostmortemPDbrainsandcells with clinically relevant UQCRC1 mutation

To validate the meta-analysis fi ndings, we obtained whole brain lysates of postmortem PD patients from two independent sources and performed a western blot analysis of UQCRC1.UQCRC1 protein levels were lower in the brains of PD patients compared with the non-disease controls (Fig. 1B). We also interrogated whether the protein level of UQCRC1 is affected in familial PD with the known UQCRC1 mutation 17 . By using the SH-SY5Y neuroblastomacells with or without UQCRC1 p.Y314S mutant knockedin ref. 19, we showed that UQCRC1 is reduced in mutant cells compared with the wild-type control cells (Fig. 1C). Taken together, UQCRC1 is decreased in both familial and idiopathic PD, supporting UQCRC1 de fi ciency may be a common phenomenon in PD.

## 0UQCRC1 defi ciency impairs mitophagy

Since mitophagy impairment is critically linked to PD, we examined whether mitophagy is reduced in the UQCRC1 -associated PD models. We utilized two fl uorescent reporters, 2xCOX8-EGFP-mCherry and mito-QC for monitoring the mitophagy fl ux 33,34 . Both reporters are composed of tandem EGFP and mCherry fused to different mitochondrial targeting sequences. The EGFP signal is quenched in acidic environments once the damaged mitochondria are fused with the lysosomes to form mitolysosomes. Thus, the EGFP + /mCherry + and EGFP-/mCherry + (red-only) fl uorescence signals indicate non-acidi fi ed compartments and acidi fi ed mitolysosomes, respectively (Fig. 2A). In SH-SY5Y cells with the knock-in of the familial form of UQCRC1 p.Y314S, the number of red-only puncta (indicating mitolysosomes) at the basal condition was similar to that in the control cells. Upon mitophagy induction by the treatment with mitochondrial toxins oligomycin and antimycin A (OA), the mutant cells showedfewermitolysosomes than the control cells (Fig. 2B), suggesting that UQCRC1 mutation blunts mitophagy fl ux. Since UQCRC1 de fi ciency is a commonfeatureofidiopathic PD (Fig. 1), we examined whether mitophagy is also impaired upon the knockdown of UQCRC1 . Depletion of UQCRC1 with three different shRNAs with good knockdown ef fi ciency (Fig. S3) resulted in fewer mitolysosomes upon OA treatment (Fig. 2C). The similarities between the mutant cells and knockdown cells led us to use the two models interchangeably in the following cell experiments. In Drosophila , by using the dopaminergic neuron-speci fi c driver TH-GAL4 , we found mitolysosome decrease in cells expressing uqcrc1 RNAi( uq RNAi ) compared to the control group ( UAS-LacZ ). The decrease was comparable to cells expressing RNAi of key autophagy factor Atg5 ( Atg5 RNAi ), suggesting that reduced UQCRC1 impedes mitophagy.

## PINK1 is downregulated in UQCRC1 -associated PD models

PINK1 and PRKN are key regulators of mitophagy and are well-known familial PD genes. We performed another meta-analysis and found that PINK1 was also de fi cient in idiopathic PD midbrains (Fig. 3A), while PRKN wasnot(Fig. S4A). In the meta-analysis of PINK1 , 17 datasets were enrolled (two datasets, GSE20333 and GSE43490, excluded for no PINK1 mRNA data). The estimated average log2-fold change of PINK1 mRNA level in PD substantia nigra compared to the control group based on the random-effects model was -0.3537 (95% CI: -0.5851 to -0.1224, p = 0.0027), equivalent to 22% reduction in PD brains. Among the datasets we included, there was no heterogeneity (Q(16) = 11.2919, p = 0.7911, tau² = 0.00, I ² = 0.00%) and the analysis was not undermined by the publication bias ( p = 0.9032 and p = 0.5561, respectively, according to the rank correlation and the regression test), giving good con fi dence of the results (Fig. S2B).

Accession code

GSE49036

GSE20141

GSE7621

GSE7307

GSE8397

GSE20163

GSE20164

GSE20292

GSE20333

GSE54282

GSE24378

GSE42966

GSE43490

GSE20159

GSE168496

GSE114517

GSE136666

GSE182622

GSE169755

RE Model

48kDa

48kDa -

35kDa -

Fold change (log2) [95% CI]

Control 1

Control2

· control

Fig. 1 | UQCRC1 expression is decreased in PD. A Forest plot for meta-analysis of the fold change of UQCRC1 mRNA level in postmortem substantia nigra between PD patients and control. Signi fi cantly reduced expression of UQCRC1 in PD was noted (log2-fold change -0.2981, 95% CI: -0.5204 to -0.0758, p = 0.0086. B Western blot analysis of postmortem brains from two independent sources revealed

decreased UQCRC1inPD.Three technical replicates were conducted. (C) UQCRC1 was lower in SH-SY5Y cells carrying the UQCRC1 p.Y314S mutant ( N = 6). * p &lt; 0.05, *** p &lt; 0.001 (2-tailed unpaired t-test with Welch ' s correction for 1B and 1 C). Abbreviations: CI, con fi dence interval; RE, random effects.

Fold change (log2)

DMSO

OA

COX8

EGFP

mCherry mCherry

GFP

FIS1

(mito-QC)

EGF

Fig. 2 | Mitophagy fl ux in cellular and fl y models of UQCRC1 -associated PD. A Schematics of the two mitophagy reporters, 2xCOX8-EGFP-mCherry and mitoQC. B In SH-SY5Y cells, OA-induced increase in the mitolysosome numbers per cell is less prominent upon p.Y314S mutation ( N = 3). Representative images and quantitation of mitolysosomes of wild-type (WT) and p.Y314S mutant SH-SY5Y cells expressing mitophagy reporter 2xCOX8-EGFP-mCherry. Cells were treated with either DMSO or OA for 8 hours. Scale bars: 10 μ m. C The mitolysosome numbers were also reduced in SH-SY5Y cells with knockdown of UQCRC1 ( N = 3). Representative images and quantitation of mitolysosomes of SH-SY5Y cells

expressing either control or UQCRC1 shRNA and mitophagy reporter and treated with as in (B). Scale bars: 10 μ m. D In fl y dopaminergic neurons (N ≧ 19), decreased mitolysosomes per mitochondrial content was found when uqcrc1 is depleted, suggesting mitophagy impairment. Scale bars: 1.6 μ m. For measuring mitophagy, 2xCOX8-EGFP-mCherry was used in 2B and 2 C, and mito-QC was used in 2D. Arrowheads indicated mitolysosomes. * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01, *** p &lt; 0.001 (one-way ANOVAwith Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn ' s multiple comparison test for 2B and 2 C, and Welch ' s ANOVA test followed by unpaired t -tests with Welch ' s correction for 2D).

normalized PINK1 mRNA level

Fig. 3 | PINK1 mRNA is decreased in UQCRC1 -associated PD. A Forest plot for meta-analysis of the fold change of PINK1 mRNAlevel in postmortem SN between PD patients and control. Reduced expression of PINK1 in PD was noted (log2-fold change: -0.3537, 95% CI: -0.5851 to -0.1224, p = 0.0027). B PINK1 mRNAlevel and UQCRC1 mRNA level were positively correlated (Pearson correlation 0.6667,

p &lt; 0.0001) in the postmortem brain SN. C The PINK1 mRNA decreased in SHSY5Y cells with UQCRC1 p.Y314S mutant ( N = 3). * p &lt; 0.05 (2-tailed unpaired t-test with Welch ' s correction). Abbreviations: CI, con fi dence interval; RE, random effects.

PINK1

Fold change (log2) [95% CI]:

With the aim of investigating the correlation between UQCRC1 and PINK1 , we normalized the expression levels of both UQCRC1 and PINK1 from 0 to 1 in each dataset. Pooled results showed that there was a strong positive correlation (r = 0.6667, p &lt; 0.0001) between UQCRC1 and PINK1 mRNA levels (Fig. 3B). In contrast, the correlation between UQCRC1 and PRKN was weak despite reaching statistical signi fi cance (r = 0.1805, p =0.0017) (Fig. S4C).

To validate the above fi ndings, we examined the levels of PINK1 and PRKN mRNAin control vs. UQCRC1 p.Y314S SH-SY5Y cells. The RNAseq revealed that the PINK1 mRNA level was reduced in the mutant cells (Fig. 3C), while the PRKNmRNAlevel was not (Fig. S4D). These results are consistent with our meta-analysis outcome that the level of PINK1 , but not Parkin , was reduced upon UQCRC1 de fi ciency.

## UQCRC1deficiency impairs the initiation of PINK/Parkin-mediated mitophagy

Given the identi fi cation of PINK1 downregulation in UQCRC1 -associated models, we next examined whether the molecular events associated with PINK1activation are affected by UQCRC1 de fi ciency in SH-SY5Y cells. We monitored the mitochondrial recruitment of Parkin and the phosphorylation of ubiquitin, two signature molecular events of PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy in SH-SY5Y cells with UQCRC1 knockdown. We expressed FLAG-Parkin in SH-SY5Y cells and performed immuno fl uorescent staining of mitochondrial protein ATP5A and FLAG-Parkin to evaluate the mitochondriallocalization of Parkin during mitophagy induction. UQCRC1 knockdown reduced the extent of OA-induced mitochondrial recruitment of Parkin (Fig. 4A), indicating that UQCRC1 loss hampers Parkin activation during mitophagy. Western blot detection of phosphorylated ubiquitin at serine 65 (p-Ub) revealed a time-dependent increase in p-Ub following OA treatment in wild-type cells, but the accumulation of p-Ub species was dampened in UQCRC1-depleted cells (Fig. 4B). To sum up, our data showed that the initiation process of the PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy is compromised upon UQCRC1 de fi ciency, consistent with the observation of PINK1 downregulation in the UQCRC1 models of PD.

## PINK1 overexpression is neuroprotective in UQCRC1 -associated PD

Previous studies have shown that PINK1 overexpression is neuroprotective in PD models induced by MPTP or α -synucleinopathy 35,36 . We wondered whether PINK1 overexpression also provides a similar effect in the UQCRC1 -associated PD models. First, we found that, in the Drosophila model with pan-neuronal ( elav-GAL4 ) depletion of uqcrc1 , the expression level of Pink1 was also reduced (Fig. 5A) and overexpression of Pink1 rescued the climbing defect of uqcrc1 RNAi fl ies (Fig. 5B). To evaluate whether Pink1 overexpression restored mitophagy, we used mito-QC and measured the mitolysosome numbers per brain area and the mitolysosome to mitochondria ratio as the indicators of mitophagy fl ux. Both parameters were reduced in fl y brains with uqcrc1 de fi ciency (Fig. 5C -E), consistent with the fi ndings in SH-SY5Y cells and fl y dopaminergic neurons (Figs. 2C, D). The mitophagy impairment was reversed by Pink1 overexpression (Fig. 5C -E). These fi ndings suggest that enhancing PINK1 function improves phenotypic defects in UQCRC1 -associated PD.

## PINK1activatorsareneuroprotective in UQCRC1 -associatedPD

To verify the hypothesis, we tested whether the treatment with two known PINK1activators, kinetin and MTK458, provided neuroprotective effects in uqcrc1 RNAi fl ies and UQCRC1 mutant SH-SY5Y cells. We found that MTK458 improved the climbing defects as well as the PPL1 cluster dopaminergic neuronal loss in fl ies with neuronal uqcrc1 de fi ciency (Figs. 6A, B). The improving effect was blunted by Pink1 null mutant (Fig. S5). In addition, we have previously shown that the UQCRC1 mutant leads to reduced neurite length in SH-SY5Y cells 17 . In UQCRC1 knockdown cells, the similar neurite shortening was observed. MTK458 rescued the defect in both models (Fig. 6C and S6A) and also improved mitophagy (Fig. 6D). Kinetin exhibited the similar bene fi t in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. S6B).

Collectively, these results demonstrated that the use of PINK1 activators may be a therapeutic strategy for treating PD in which UQCRC1 de fi ciency is featured.

## Discussion

In this study, with meta-analysis of postmortem brain datasets, we found that UQCRC1 expression is reduced in PD. These data suggested that UQCRC1 is more than a gene associated with rare familial PD. Its expression level can also serve as a biomarker of PD with potential roles in PD pathogenesis. Our previous study showed that de fi ciency of UQCRC1 leads to cytochrome c release to the cytosol and induces apoptosis 19 . Here, we demonstrated that UQCRC1 de fi ciency also resulted in impaired mitophagy. We found that UQCRC1 expression level positively correlated with the level of PINK1 in human substantia nigra; this fi nding is further supported by our experiments in the fl y and the cell culture models. We were able to show that overexpression of Pink1 rescued the locomotion and mitophagy defects of the uqcrc1knockdown fl ies. Treatment with the PINK1 activator, kinetin and MTK458, provided bene fi cial effects in both the fl y and cell culture models, suggesting the therapeutic potential of PINK1 activators in treating UQCRC1 -associated familial and idiopathic PD.

The role of UQCRC1 in PD has been thought controversial. While the initial study identi fi ed a UQCRC1 p.Y314S mutant in a Taiwanese family 17 , subsequent larger cohort studies 37 -40 did not replicate an association of commonorrare genetic variants with PD. However, more recent data from the UK Biobank identi fi ed PD cases with different UQCRC1 proteintruncating variants 41 , and several missense variants (p.E110D, p.I311L, p.G405V) have also been linked to PD 18,39,42 . These fi ndings suggest that although UQCRC1 mutations may be rare, the gene does contribute to PD pathogenesis. Our study broadens this scope by demonstrating a widespread decrease in UQCRC1 expression in common idiopathic PD, providing further evidence for its involvement in PD pathogenesis.

Our study proposes OXPHOS stress as an etiology of impaired mitophagy in PD. As the brain ages, the expression levels of proteins related to the mitochondrial respiratory chain, OXHPOS, and mitophagy activities changeovertime 43 -45 . A recent study in mice revealed that, in the dopamineproducing nigrostriatal neurons, mitophagy fl ux was enhanced in old age 45 , suggesting an increased dependence on mitophagy to maintain neuronal integrity during aging. In other words, the aged neurons become more susceptible to mitophagy insuf fi ciency. In this study, we showed that OXPHOS stress led by UQCRC1 mutation or de fi ciency undermined mitophagy, especially when there was an increased demand for mitochondrial turnover upon damage (Fig. 2B). While our results provide a crucial link between OXPHOS stress and PD pathogenesis, the complexity of this relationship calls for further investigation. Understanding the interregulations between OXPHOS, mitophagy, and aging will be crucial for developing targeted interventions for PD.

Ourstudy has several limitations. First, while we analyzed brain lysates from two independent sources that provided consistent data regarding UQCRC1levelsinPD,thecon fi dence in our fi ndings would be signi fi cantly increased with more extensive patient enrollment and additional brain lysate analysis. Second, our work identi fi ed a correlation between UQCRC1 de fi ciency and PINK1 downregulation, but the detailed molecular mechanism directly linking the loss of UQCRC1 to PINK1 de fi ciency remains to be elucidated. Factors that have been experimentally validated to regulate PINK1 expression include ATF3 46 , p53 47 , sirtuins 48 , and NRF1 49 . Repressors like ATF3 and p53 are known to suppress PINK1. Interestingly, while p53 levels are reported to be upregulated in PD brains 50 , ATF3 mRNA is downregulated 51 , suggesting intricate and context-speci fi c regulation in vivo. In contrast, sirtuins and NRF1 are the positive regulators of PINK1 transcription. Sirtuins are a class of NAD + -dependent deacetylase, comprising SIRT1-7 52 . FOXO3 deacetylation dependent on SIRT1 or SIRT3 is essential for PINK1 transcription 48 . In postmortem PD brains, concomitant reduction of SIRT3 and PINK1 levels have been found in some dopaminergic neurons 14 . NRF1 is a transcription factor responsive to mitochondrial

shRNA:

FLAG-

Parkin

ATP5A

Merge

Control

UQCRC1 #3

Fig. 4 | The mitophagy initiation process is impaired upon UQCRC1 de fi ciency. A In SH-SY5Y cells de fi cient of UQCRC1, OA-induced the mitochondrial recruitment of FLAG-Parkin (arrowheads) was decreased ( N = 3). Representative images and quantitation of SH-SY5Y cells stably expressing FLAG-Parkin and together with either control or UQCRC1 shRNAweretreatedwitheitherDMSOorOAfor4 hours. Scale bars: 10 μ m. *** p &lt; 0.001 (ordinary one-way ANOVA test followed by Sidak multiple comparison test). B UQCRC1 knockdown attenuated OA-induced

stress 53 . Reduced NRF1 has also been reported in PD brains 54 , suggesting the downregulation of PINK1. It is not known whether the dysregulation of the SIRT3-FOXO3-PINK1andNRF1-PINK1axescontributestothemolecular etiology of the UQCRC1 model of PD or not. Further studies are required to pinpoint which regulatory axis is responsible for the observed PINK1 decrease.

PINK1haslongbeenconsideredapotentialtherapeutictargetforPD 55 . Several activators have been developed, such as the adenine analogs kinetin 56 , kinetin riboside 57 , N 6 -benzyladenosine 58 , and MTK458 59 . Despite some concerns about their structural compatibility 60 or speci fi city 61 , importantly, they have been shown to activate PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy. Most of these activators were tested in vitro, while their roles in PDanimalmodels are far less known. Kinetin has been tested in a fl y model

phosphorylation of ubiquitin in SH-SY5Y cells. Western blot analysis and quantifi cation of time-course experiments ( N = 3) in SH-SY5Y cells stably expressing either control or UQCRC1 shRNA,followed by a treatment with either DMSO or OA for the indicated time points. Samples were subjected to Western blot analysis (left), and band intensities were measured by densitometry and expressed as normalized pUb/actin (right). ** p &lt; 0.01 (two-way ANOVA).

of heteroplasmic mitochondrial diseases and showed good responses in terms of climbing activity and dopaminergic neuron loss 62 . Kinetin has also been tested in a mice model of Alzheimer ' s disease with promising responses 63 . However, in a mouse model of α -synucleinopathy, the kinetin failed to rescue both the behavior de fi cits and the dopaminergic neuronal loss in spite of the high dose treatment 64 . It is not known to what extent the mitochondria are damaged in their α -synuclein mouse model, and we hypothesized that PINK1 activators might be more effective in the PD models that featured evident OXPHOS de fi cits and mitophagy impairment instead of those associated with aggregates of neurotoxic peptides such as α -synuclein. Recently Chin, et al. showed that MTK458 provided bene fi cial effects in the mice with striatal injection of alpha-synuclein preformed fi brils (PFFs) 59 . In that study, they showed that the PFFs can induce OXPHOS

Ctrl

ts

mCherry merge

dysfunction and mitophagy defects in primary neurons, thus explaining the promising outcome of MTK458. In the era of precision medicine, we anticipate that PINK1 activators can be used in patients showing OXPHOS defects, such as those with UQCRC1 de fi ciency.

In sum, we demonstrated that UQCRC1 de fi ciency is widely found in PD among different datasets. We also showed that UQCRC1

de fi ciency is linked to PINK1-dependent mitophagy impairment, broadening our understanding of the role of OXPHOS defects in PD pathogenesis. As a proof of concept, we showed that PINK1 activators elicit bene fi cial effects in improving phenotypic defects of UQCRC1 -associated PD cellular and fl y models. These observations suggest that PD patients with OXPHOS defects may bene fi t from treatments that

Pink1

MTK458 (6 h):

(6 h)

UAS-uq RNAi

+ MTK458

Fig. 6 | Activators of PINK1 are neuroprotective in UQCRC1 -associated PD. A In adult fl ies with uqcrc1 de fi ciency, treatment of 5 mM kinetin or 20 mM MTK458 for 2 weeks improved the climbing defect. B MTK458 also rescued the PPL1 cluster dopaminergic neuronal (green: anti-TH, magenta: anti-DLG) loss in adult fl ies with uqcrc1 de fi ciency ( N ≧ 10). UAS-GFP RNAi was used as the control in A and B. Scale bar: 10 μ m. C In SH-SY5Y cells de fi cient of UQCRC1 , the shortened neurite length was rescued by MTK458 (50 μ M)( N = 3). Scale bar: 20 μ m. D Representative images

elav-GAL4&gt;

and quanti fi cation of SH-SY5Y cells expressing 2xCOX8-EGFP-mCherry together with either control or UQCRC1 shRNA treated with DMSO, OA, or OA + MTK458 (25 μ M) as indicated ( N = 3). Arrowheads indicate the mitolysosomes. Scale bar: 10 μ m. ns, not signi fi cant, * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01, *** p &lt; 0.001 (Welch ' s ANOVAtest followed by unpaired t -tests with Welch ' s correction for 6 A and 6 C, and KruskalWallis test followed by Dunn ' s multiple comparison test for 6B and 6D).

Climbing index

MTK458

Kinetin shRNA

UQCRC1

activate PINK1, providing new insights into the precision treatment of PD in the future.

## Methods

## Datasets selection and the meta-analysis of gene expression levels

WeconductedasystematicsearchontheGeneExpressionOmnibus(GEO) using Boolean keywords: (Parkinson ' s disease) AND ' Homo sapiens ' [porgn:\_\_txid9606] AND (substantia nigra) to obtain complete datasets. Datasets included in our analysis had to meet two speci fi c criteria. First, the studies must involve the SN or laser-captured dopaminergic neurons from the SN of individuals diagnosed with Parkinson ' s disease or incidental Lewy body disease (iLBD) compared to control groups. Second, the results must be analyzable with GEO2R. Any datasets that did not satisfy both criteria were excluded from the analysis. The searches were conducted up to September 2024.

All gene expression values were log 2 -transformed, with the exception of those already pre-processed (e.g., RMA signal intensity). We calculated the group-speci fi c mean and standard deviation for both the control and PD groups within each dataset. The log 2 -based fold change was then derived by taking the difference between the control group ' s mean and the PD group ' s mean. This subtraction step served to normalize the PD group expression levels to the control group (i.e., setting the control to a baseline), facilitating the integration of expression data across diverse datasets.

The meta-analysis was conducted with Jamovi 2.3.28, a software package based on the R statistical language. The random effects model was used to analyze the differences in the expression levels of UQCRC1 , PINK1 , and PRKN between the control subjects and PD patients. The heterogeneity among the included studies was assessed with Cochrane ' s Q test and I 2 index. To analyze the publication bias the funnel plot was generated for visual inspection and Begg and Mazumdar rank correlation test and Egger ' s regression intercept test were also used. To examine the correlation of the gene expression levels of UQCRC1 with the levels of PINK1 or PRKN , fi rstly the gene expression levels were normalized from 0 to 1 in each dataset. The normalized results were pooled together. Pearson correlation was then applied to describe the strength of the correlation of genes of interest.

## Human postmortem brain lysates

Human whole brain lysates were obtained from Novus Biologicals (healthy subjects: NB820-59177 (male, age 82); PD patients: NB820-59407 (female, age 71)) and GeneTex (healthy subjects: cat# GTX28771 (male, age 77); PD patients: cat# GTX26602 (female, age 78)). Information about disease stage was not provided by the manufacturers.

## Cell lines and culture conditions

Generation of the UQCRC1 p.Y314S knock-in (KI) mutation in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells has been described in our previous study 17 . Both wild-type and UQCRC1 mutant cells were grown in DMEM/F12 medium (GIBCO, 12500062) enriched with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO, A3160502) and kept at 37 °C in a humidi fi ed incubator with 5% CO2. The cells were subcultured upon reaching con fl uence, typically every 5 days.

## Drosophila strains and genetics

Drosophila stocks and crosses were maintained at 25 °C on standard medium following standard fl y husbandry. Information on individual fl y strains and genotypes for experiments are listed in Table S2 and can be found on FlyBase.

## Antibodies

For the immuno fl uorescence analysis, primary antibodies were mouse antiATP5A (Proteintech 66037-1-Ig, 1:1000), mouse anti-DLG (DSHB Cat# 4F3, 1:200), mouse anti-FLAG tag (Sigma F1804, 1:1000), and rabbit antiTyrosine Hydroxylase (MerckMillipore Cat#AB152, 1: 1000). The secondary antibodies were Donkey anti-rabbit IgG AlexaFluor 594 (Invitrogen

A21207, 1:750), Donkey anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen A21202, 1:750), Goat anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor ® 647 (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories RRID: AB\_2338902, 1:500) and Goat anti-rabbit IgG Cy ™ 3 Af fi niPure ™ (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories RRID: AB\_2338000, 1:500). For Western blot analysis, primary antibodies were mouse anti-UQCRC1 (Thermo Fisher 459140, 1:2000), rabbit antiUQCRC1 (GTX101896, 1:5000), mouse anti-Parkin (Abcam ab77924, 1:2000), mouse anti-actin-HRP (Santa Cruz sc-47778 HRP, 1:1000), rabbit anti-phospho-S65 ubiquitin (Cell Signaling #62802, 1:1000), mouse antiGAPDH (Santa Cruz sc-32233, 1:2000) and mouse anti-actin (MAB1501, 1:10000). The secondary antibodies were Peroxidase Af fi niPure ™ goat antimouse IgG (H + L) (Jackson ImmunoResearch 115-035-003, 1:20000), Peroxidase Af fi niPure ™ goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) (Jackson ImmunoResearch 111-035-003, 1:10000).

## Chemicals and PINK1 activators

For mitophagy induction in SH-SY5Y cells, cells were treated with oligomycin and antimycin (OA) at concentrations of 2.5 μ M and 250 nM, respectively.

As to PINK1 activators, kinetin (CAS 525-79-1) and MTK458 (CAS 2499962-58-0) were tested in undifferentiated SH-SY5Y cells under 25 μ M or 50 μ M, using dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as the solvent. For adult fl y treatment, 7-day-old fl ies were collected and transferred to vials supplementedwith70 μ Lof5 mMkinetinor20 mMMTK458onthefoodsurface. Flies were transferred to fresh new vials every 2 days until experiments.

## Generation of shRNA knockdown cell lines

Plasmids encoding shRNA targeting UQCRC1 were co-transfected with helper plasmids pCMV Δ R8.91 and pMD.G (obtained from RNAi Core, Academia Sinica, Taiwan) into HEK293FT cells with T-Pro Non-liposome Transfection Reagent II (T-Pro Biotechnology, Taiwan). Lentiviral supernatant was harvested 48 h post transfection and fi ltered through a 0.45 μ m fi lter. For the generation of shRNA stable knockdown SH-SY5Y cells, virus supernatant at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of three and 10 μ g/ml polybrene was used to infect SH-SY5Y cells. Twenty-four hours after infection, the virus-containing medium was replaced with fresh media. Forty-eight hours after infection, the infected SH-SY5Y were selected with puromycin at 1.0 μ g/ml. shRNA lentiviruses were obtained from the RNA Technology Platform and Gene Manipulation Core. The shRNA target sequences are as follows: Control (TRC2.void), 5 ' -AGTTCAGTTACG ATATCATGTCTCGAGACATTCGCGAGTAACTGAACTTTTTTG-3 ' ; UQCRC1 #1 (TRCN0000233155), 5 ' -CTGGCTTTCAAGGGAACAAAG3 ' ; UQCRC1 #2 (TRCN0000233156), 5 ' -TATGCGAGATGTGGTCTT TAA-3 ' ; UQCRC1 #3 (TRCN0000233157), 5 ' -GGTGGCATCCCATGGA CATAT-3 ' .

## Light microscopy

Micrographs of SH-SY5Y cells (Figs. 2A, B, and 4A) were acquired with a Zeiss AxioImager M2 microscope equipped with Apotome 2, Axiocam 702 mono camera, and Zeiss PLAN APOCHROMAT 63X/1.4NA Oil DIC objective. For SH-SY5Y cell neurite length experiments, (Fig. 6C and S5), bright- fi eld images were obtained with a LSM880 microscope. The neurite length was then quanti fi ed with ImageJ. Micrographs of the fl y brains were acquired with a Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope. The same acquisition time was used in the samples stained with identical antibodies in the same experiment.

## Mitophagy fl ux assay in cell lines

For measuring the lysosomal delivery of damaged mitochondria, a plasmid expressing the mitophagy fl ux reporter 2xCOX8-EGFP-mCherry-PEST was transiently transfected to SH-SY5Y cells with the TransIT-X2 Dynamic Delivery System (Mirus Bio) according to manufacturer ' s instruction. Forty-eight hours after transfection, cells were treated with either DMSO or OA(oligomycin/antimycin)for4 -8 h. The samples were subsequently fi xed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min and mounted with ProLong

Diamond Antifade Mountant. The numbers of mitolysosomes (red-only puncta) were quantitated with the ImageJ script (mQC counter) 65 . We performed three independent biological replicate experiments. In each replicate, we analyzed greater than 80 cells.

## Mitophagy fl ux assay in Drosophila

To monitor the mitophagy fl ux in vivo, we expressed the reporter mito-QC either in the whole fl y brains or speci fi cally in the dopaminergic neurons. The fl y brains were dissected at about 2 weeks old and subsequently fi xed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 minutes and mounted with RapiClear 1.47. For dopaminergic neurons, the ratio of mitolysosome to mitochondrial content in each cell was quanti fi ed with the spot analysis of Imaris software (v9.8.2 and v9.9.0, Oxford Instrument, Bitplane Inc.). For the whole brain images, both the mitolysosome numbers per brain area and the ratio of mitolysosome to mitochondrial content were quanti fi ed with the ImageJ script (mQC counter) 65 .

## Immunofl uorescent analyses of Parkin recruitment

SH-SY5Y cells expressing FLAG-Parkin were treated with either DMSO or OA (oligomycin/antimycin) for 4 h. The cells were fi xed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min and permeabilized with ice-cold methanol for 10 min. The samples were subsequently stained for FLAG-Parkin and ATP5A (mitochondria) and mounted with ProLong Diamond Antifade Mountant(Invitrogen P36971). Cell with or without complete translocation of FLAG-Parkin were manually scored in a blinded manner.

## Immunohistochemistry of fl y dopaminergic neurons

Drosophila adult brains were dissected and fi xed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min. Samples were then washed with 1% PBST (PBS + 1%TX-100) for three times. The fi xed brains were then blocked in 1% PBST with 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA, BioShop Canada Inc. #ALB001) and subsequently probed with primary and secondary antibodies. We focus on the PPL1 cluster dopaminergic neurons because they are the most commonly used indicator for monitoring dopaminergic neuronal loss in fl y PD models.

## Climbing assay for locomotor defects

The climbing (negative geotaxis) activity of fl ies was measured by the percentage of fl ies that tapped down to the bottom of the vial to climb up over 3 cminacertaintimeinterval(30 s in Fig. 5B and 10 s in Fig. 6A). During the experiments, 10 -20 fl ies with speci fi ed genotypes were placed in a vial. The whole process was video-recorded for analysis.

## Western blot analysis

Cell lysates were prepared in 1x Laemmli buffer containing 2.5% β -mercaptoethanol. Samples were boiled at 95 °C for 5 min, resolved with SDS-PAGE, and transferred to PVDF (Bio-Rad #1620177) membrane. Membranes were blocked with 5% BSA in TBS-T (0.1% Tween-20) and incubated with primary and secondary antibodies as indicated. The signals of target proteins were visualized with the chemiluminescent substrate and imaged by the luminescence image system LAS-4000 (GE).

## RNA-seq

Human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell lines were used for mRNA nextgeneration sequencing. RNA extracted from SH-SY5Y cells were treated with the Ribo-Zero Gold kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA) to remove rRNAs and subsequently fragmented into 180 bp segments. The RNA fragments were reverse-transcribed to cDNA with TruSeq Stranded total RNA kit (Illumina). Speci fi c adapters were ligated to both ends of the cDNA fragments to construct the sequencing library. Next, the sequencing library was hybridized with the oligonucleotide sequence on the surface of fl ow cells (Illumina), where each bound fragment underwent bridge ampli fi cation to form clonal clusters. Finally, all of the clusters on the fl ow cells were sequenced using the Illumina NextSeq 500 with paired-end 75 bp read length and 25 M reads per sample (Illumina).

## RNA extraction from fl ies and quantitative real-time PCR

Total RNA was extracted from fl y heads with the Quick-RNA Miniprep Kit (ZYMO RESEARCH #R1054). The RNA concentrations were normalized before proceeding to cDNA synthesis. Reverse transcription was carried out with the MMLV high-performance cDNA synthesis kit (Epicentre #ERT12910K). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using the IQ2 SYBR Green Fast qPCR System Master Mix (Bio Genesis #DBU-006) on an ABI QuantStudio 5 (Applied Biosystems). We used rp49 as the endogenous control. The primer sequences were: rp49 Fwd: ACTTCATCCGCCACC AGTCG, rp49 Rev: CGGGTGCGCTTGTTCGATCC; pink1 Fwd: CATAG CCAAAGGTTGTGC; pink1 Rev: ATCCGAGGCAACATCTTTCTTGA.

## Statistical analysis

Quantitative data were analyzed using a 2-tailed unpaired t -test, MannWhitney test, ordinary one-way ANOVA test, Welch ' s ANOVA test, Kruskal -Wallis test, and two-way ANOVA. All the graphs were generated using GraphPad Prism 8. All data in bar graphs were expressed as mean ± SD. P values of less than 0.05 were considered statistically signi fi cant. * p &lt; 0.05, ** p &lt; 0.01, and *** p &lt; 0.001. All the statistical details of experiments can be found in the fi gure legends.

## Data availability

The data generated during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Received: 28 April 2025; Accepted: 6 January 2026;