## Introduction

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a chronic pathology of the central  nervous  system  (CNS)  that  affects  approximately  1% of the world's population over 65 years of age and is considered  the  second  most  prevalent  neurodegenerative  disease in the world (Ascherio and Schwarzschild 2016 ). PD is also known as paralysis agitans and results mainly from the progressive  destruction  of  neurons  in  the  substantia  nigra pars compacta (SNpc), which sends dopamine (DA)-secreting nerve fibers to the basal nuclei of the striatum: caudate and putamen (Tysnes and Storstein 2017 ). The etiology of PD has  been  the  subject  of  intense  investigation  and  has long  remained  unclear.  Currently,  studies  suggest  that,  in

addition to genetic factors and exposure to environmental toxins, conditions such as diabetes mellitus and obesity may increase the risk of developing PD due to insulin resistance in the brain, which may compromise the dopamine signaling pathway (Brudek 2019 ; Fiory et al. 2019 ).

Clinically,  PD is characterized by (1) motor symptoms such  as  stiffness  of  a  large  part  of  the  body's  muscles, intense difficulty in initiating movements known as bradyki -nesia, postural instability, leading to imbalance and frequent falls, and tremors in the extremities, even when the person is at rest; and (2) non-motor symptoms such as gastrointestinal dysfunction, depression, sleep disorders and cognitive deficit (Guyton and Hall. 2011).

Depression  affects  approximately  30-40%  of  patients with PD and is the main non-motor symptom involving the CNS. Among patients who are treated for depression, half remain depressed, suggesting treatment ineffectiveness (Fri -sina et al. 2009 ;  Bhattacharjee et al. 2018 ).  Depression is associated with a central nervous system (CNS) immunoinflammatory disease characterized by increased expression of  pro-inflammatory  cytokines,  oxidative  and  nitrosative stress (Moylan et al. 2013 , 2014 ).

In  addition,  studies  suggest  that  the  peripheral  nervous system (PNS) and enteric nervous system (ENS) may also be  involved  in  the  neurodegenerative  process  underlying PD.  Gastrointestinal  (GI)  dysfunction  is  a  common  nonmotor symptoms affecting approximately 80% of patients, and it can occur at any stage of PD, including years before diagnosis (Johnson et al. 2018 ; Zhang et al. 2023). According to the Braak hypothesis, the inflammatory microenvi -ronment and accumulation of toxic α-synuclein, may occur in the gut decades before the onset of motor symptoms and subsequently reach the brain through gut-brain axis com -munication (Braak and Del Tredici 2017 ;  Van  Kessel and El Aidy 2019 ).

The  bacteria  belonging  to  the  gut  microbiota  perform essential functions for maintaining the individual's health; however,  changes  in  the  composition  and  function  of  the gut  microbiota,  characterized  by  a  reduction  in  beneficial bacteria and an increase in potentially harmful microorganisms  (gut  dysbiosis),  are  implicated  in  several  inflamma -tory  diseases,  such  as  ulcerative  colitis  (Aas  et  al.  2003), diabetes (Karlsson et al. 2013 ), asthma (Abrahamsson et al. 2014 ), and in neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases  including  Parkinson's  disease, Alzheimer's  disease, multiple sclerosis, autism, and depression (Fond et al. 2015 ; Hasegawa et al. 2015 ; Quigley 2017; Hirayama and Ohno 2021 ).

Gut  dysbiosis  can  induce  systemic  inflammation  by releasing  high  levels  of  endotoxin  (LPS)  that  induce  the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which can reach the CNS glia (Cario and Podolsky 2005). This altered gut

microbiota may be linked to gastrointestinal disturbances in PD patients, along with 'leaky gut' and intestinal inflamma -tion, which occur long before motor disturbances (Hill-Burns et al. 2017 ; Lin et al. 2018 ; Aho et al. 2019 ). Furthermore, gut  dysbiosis  contributes  to  α-synuclein  aggregation,  loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive neurons in the substantia nigra, and motor symptoms in a rotenone-induced murine model of Parkinson's disease (Fang et al. 2024).

Recently,  some  therapeutic  interventions  to  modulate intestinal microbiota have been proposed, such as probiotics, prebiotics, synbiotics, and even fecal microbiota transplantation.  Each  approach  has  advantages  and  disadvantages, but all have shown significant potential for improving PD symptoms in patients and animal models (Gazerani 2019 ; Peterson 2020; Zhao et al. b).

Prebiotics  are  carbohydrates  not  digestible  by  human cells, which are fermented by several groups of bacteria in the intestinal microbiota. The fermentation of these carbohydrates produces metabolites called short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). In the human intestine, acetate, propionate, and butyrate represent approximately 95% of all SCFAs (RíosCovián  et  al. 2016 ).  SCFAs  play  important  physiological roles, such as maintaining the integrity of the intestinal epithelial barrier, immune regulation, and providing energy for colonocytes (Tan et al. 2014 ).

The prebiotics fructooligosaccharides (FOS) and galac -tooligosaccharides (GOS) are diety fibers that promote the growth of beneficial bacteria (Burokas et al. 2017 ; Paiva et al. 2020; de Paiva et al. 2023). Furthermore, data obtained in  several  studies  suggest  that  prebiotics  promote  antidepressant and anxiolytic effects by modulating the intestinal microbiota (Paiva et al. 2020 ). We hypothesized that FOS and GOS have beneficial effects on PD-associated depres -sive-like  behavior  in  C57BL6  mice  by  modulating  SCFA production. To investigate this further, we conducted a comprehensive study using rotenone-induced C57BL6 mice, a well-established model for Parkinson's disease, to analyze the impact of FOS and GOS treatment on depressive-like behavior and explore the underlying molecular mechanisms.

## Methodology

## Animals

Male mice of the isogenic C57BL/6 line were obtained from the Aggeu Magalhães Institute (IAM-FIOCRUZ) vivarium at  the  seventh  week of age. The animals were acclimated to  a  temperature  of  18-22  °C  in  microisolators  contain -ing 4 animals each. The experimental design of this study is  in  accordance  with  the  Ethical  Principles  in  Animal

Experimentation and was approved by the Ethics Commit -tee on the Use of Animals of the IAM by protocol number 169/2021.

## Experimental design

Forty animals were divided into four experimental groups ( n =  10/group):

1. CONTROL-animals subjected to the vehicle solution subcutaneously
2. PD-animals induced with rotenone subcutaneously
3. PD + PREBIOTICS-animals  induced  with  rotenone subcutaneously and treated orally with FOS and GOS
4. PD + FLUOXETINE-animals  induced  with  rotenone subcutaneously and and treated orally with fluoxetine

Rotenone was diluted in a vehicle solution containing 98% sunflower oil + 2% DMSO and administered subcutaneously at a dose of 2.5 mg/kg/day. FOS and GOS were diluted in sterile  water  and  orally  administered  (gavage)  at  3  g/kg/ day and 4 g/kg/day, respectively. Rotenone, FOS and GOS were administered simultaneously for 20 consecutive days. Fluoxetine was used as a pattern antidepressive drug; it was diluted in sterile water and administered at a dose of 10 mg/ kg/day  simultaneously  with  rotenone  for  20  consecutive days.

All the animals were subjected to the rotarod test, open field  test  (motor  dysfunction  evaluation),  tail  suspension test, and sucrose preference test (evaluation of depressivelike behavior), and no animals were excluded. To minimize stress  and  potential  carryover  effects,  behavioral  assays were conducted in a fixed order from less to more stressful, and animals were allowed to rest undisturbed in their home cages between tests. On Day 18, the all animals were sub -mitted to the sucrose preference test. On Day 20, behavioral battery was performed in the following order: (I) open field test, (II) rotarod test, and (III) tail suspension test, with standardized rest 1 h intervals between assays. All apparatuses were cleaned with 70% ethanol between animals to reduce olfactory cues.

## Sucrose preference test

On the 18th day, the animals were presented with two water bottles on opposite sides of the cage, one containing only water and the other containing a 2% sucrose solution, for a 24-h habituation period. After this period, the animals were separated individually and again supplied with two previously weighed bottles with the same distribution for another 24 h. During this period, the bottles were switched sides once to avoid the animal's tendency towards one of the bottles.

At the end of this period, the bottles were weighed again, and consumption was established as the difference in bottle weights between before and after the 24-h period (beforeafter). The percentage of sucrose consumption was calculated using the equation: % preference for sucrose = sucrose consumption × 100/total  consumption.  Total  consumption was defined as the sum of water consumption and sucrose consumption.

## Open field test

The open field test also represents a motor assessment of the animal. This test consists of a square box (45 cm × 45 cm) with  40  cm  high  walls  that  prevent  the  animal  from escaping. The floor of the boxes was marked with a grid of lines (separated by 9 cm), and the mice were placed indi -vidually in one of the corners of the field. The number of lines crossed during a 5-min test session was recorded and counted as the total distance (Liu et al. 2015). The open field test was performed on the 20th day of the experiment.

## Rotarod test

The rotating bar test, or rotarod, represents one of the leading  and  oldest  approaches  to  characterizing  motor  dysfunctions  in  animal  models.  It  is  a  test  that  evaluates  the motor coordination and balance of the animal by its ability to remain on the cylindrical rod that moves rotationally at a constant or accelerated speed for a certain period. The protocol used in this study was based on the work of (Liu et al. 2015 ), with some adaptations. The apparatus consists of four animal dividers and a cylindrical bar. The animals were initially  habituated  to  the  rotating  bar  for  5  min  the day before the test at a constant speed of 5 rpm. On the 20th day, the animals were previously habituated for 60 min in the room of the rotarod test. They were placed on the rotating rod, and the protocol was performed in the accelerated mode of the apparatus's speed levels (5 to 37 rpm). The ani -mals remained on the rod for a maximum period of 300 s, during which time the latency to fall was recorded, which reflected the level of motor impairment of the animal (Liu et al. 2015 ).

## Tail suspension test

The  tail  suspension  test  consists  of  evaluating  'despairlike'  behavior,  which  represents  an  endophenotype  of induced  depression  in  animals.  In  this  test,  animals  are suspended  by  their  tails  with  adhesive  tape  in  a  position they cannot escape or hold onto nearby surfaces; the lack of  escape-related  behavior  is  considered  immobility  (Can et al. 2012 ). We adopted the protocol by Can et al. ( 2012 )

with  modifications,  in  which  the  animals  were  individu -ally suspended by their tails and accustomed to that position for one minute, then remained in the same position for another 5 min, where the immobility time was recorded by an observer 1 m away. After this total period of 6 min, the animals  were  returned  to  their  respective  boxes.  The  tail suspension test was performed on the 20th day.

## Immunofluorescence

The sections of frozen proximal colon samples (3 animals per group) were incubated with primary antibodies: occlu -din  (Santa  Cruz,  1:200)  and  GPR43  (Bioss  antibodies, bs13536R,  1:50)  in  antibody  dilution  buffer  (1  ×  PBS/1% BSA/0.3% Triton X-100).

Substantia  nigra  (3  animals  per  group)  sections  were incubated for double labeling with the primary antibodies anti-tyrosine  hydroxylase (Invitrogen OPA1-0405, 1:500), p-CREB  (Cell  Signaling,  #9198,  dilution  1:500),  BDNF (Alomone Labs, ANT-010, dilution 1:300), IBA-1 (Wako, 019-19741, dilution 1:500) and GFAP (Invitrogen, 130,300, dilution 1:1000). Later, the slides were left at 4 °C under constant and mild agitation, overnight. After approximately 16  h,  the  primary  antibodies  were  removed,  the  sections were washed with TBS-T 1X solution and then incubated with  conjugated  secondary  antibody  fluor  488  anti-rabbit (Invitrogen A11008, dilution 1:100) or conjugated second -ary  antibody  fluor  546  anti-mouse  (Invitrogen  A11003, 1:100) for 1 h at room temperature, and subsequently, incu -bated  with  6-diamidino-2-phenylindole  (DAPI,  Invitrogen, 1:200) for 5 min in the dark. The slices were washed, mounted in ProLong Gold Antifade (Invitrogen™ P36930), observed under a fluorescence microscope Leica DMI8 sys -tem, and processed with the Leica Application Suite LAS software (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Figures were exported  as  tiff  files  with Adobe  Photoshop  version 8. The protein immunoreactivity was quantified in several images for each mouse. Cell body counting and pixel den -sity were quantified using the Gimp 2.10.18 program (GNU Image Manipulation Program, UNIX platforms).

## Quantification of serotonin and butyrate levels

Serotonin levels in brain supernatant were assessed through enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) using specific commercial kit (Elabscience® E-EL-0033). Serum and brain butyrate levels were measured using specific commer -cial kit (CEO777Ge, Cloud-clone, Wuhan, China). All pro -cedures were performed in duplicate in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions.

## Western blot

The  Substantia  nigra,  pre-frontal  cortex  and  colon  were rapidly  dissected  and  homogenized  in  an  extraction  solu -tion containing protease inhibitor cocktail (10 mM EDTA, Amresco, Solon, USA; 2 mM phenylmethane sulfonyl fluo -ride, 100 mM NaF, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM NaVO4,  10  µg  of  aprotinin  /  mL  and  100  mM  Tris,  pH 7.4-Sigma-Aldrich). The samples (10 animals/per group) were mixed and homogenized to form a pool for each group. The homogenates were centrifuged and frozen at - 80 °C. The proteins (30 μg/μL) were separated on sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) polyacrylamide by gel electrophoresis under reduced conditions and were then transferred to the nitrocellulose membrane (THERMO SCIENTIFIC 88018) by MiniPROTEAN® precast gels (BIO-RAD 1658004). After, the membranes were blocked with 3% BSA and incubated over -night with the following antibodies diluted in blocking solution (1.5% BSA, 0.02% Tris phosphate-buffered, and 0.01% Tween):

- a) Substantia nigra and pre-frontal cortex: tyrosine hydroxylase (Merck AB152, 1:500), α-synuclein (Santa Cruz, 1:1000), IBA-1 (Wako 016-200001, 1:500),  phospho-α  synuclein  (Abcam,  ab51253),  anti IL-1β (Genway GWP-BPB232, 1:1000), anti-p-NFkB (Abcam,  ab97726,  1:1000),  p-CREB  (Cell  signaling #9198,  1:1000),  anti-iNOS  (BD  610600,  1:1000)  and BDNF (Alomone ANT-10, 1,500), PSD-95 (Alomone #APZ-009,  1:500),  serotonin  transporter-SERT  (Alo -mone labs AMT004, 1:200), GPR109 (Invitrogen PA590,579, 1:500).
- b) Colon: ocludin (Santa cruz sc-133256, 1:500); zonula occludens  (Santa  cruz-sc-33725,  1:500);  phospho-α synuclein  (Abcam  ab51253,  1:500);  phospho-NFkB (Cell signalling #3003, 1:1000); IL-1β (abcan ab9722, 1:1000).

After washing, the membranes were incubated with peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit horseradish (HRP) (Sigma-Aldrich  A9169, 1:8000),  and  anti-mouse  HRP (Sigma-Aldrich  A0161,  1:5000).  A  chemiluminescence reagent  (Super  Signal,  Pierce,  Ref.  34,080)  was  used  to make the  labeled  protein  bands  visible  in  the  iBright  CL 1000  system  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  A44241).  Later, the protein antibodies were stripped from the membranes, which were reprobed with the monoclonal anti-β-actin anti -body (Sigma-Aldrich A2228, 1: 5000) as a loading control. Protein densitometry was performed using the Image J 1.38 software (NIH, MD, USA). The results were confirmed by at least three repetitions for each protein investigated, and

a)

I (seconds)

Latency to fall

Rotarod Test ns

b)

statistical  analyses  were  performed  using  the  values  that were obtained. 20

## 16S rRNA gene sequence-based microbiota analysis

PD

CONTROL

approximately 17% of sequences potentially unclassifiable to species level in complex samples.

## Statistical analysis

PD+PREB PD+FLU

After  euthanasia,  fecal  samples  (5  mice  per  group)  were collected and immediately put at 4 °C (on ice) and subse -quently  stored  at  -  80  °C.  For  the  metagenomic  sequenc -ing, the DNA was extracted using magnetic beads (Christoff et  al.,  2017).  Sequencing  library  preparation  for  bacterial identification  was  prepared  using  the  V3/V4  16S  rRNA gene 341F (CCTACGGGRSGCAGCAG) (Wang and Qian  2009)  and  806R  (GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT) (Caporaso et al. 2012) primers, targeting an approximately 465  bp  amplicon,  and  the  samples  were  sequenced  in  a MiSeq  system  (Illumina,  USA),  using  the  standard  Illumina primers provided by the manufacturer kit. Raw data from MiSeq was processed using a pipeline owned by Neoprospecta company. Illumina FASTQ files had the primers trimmed and their accumulated error evaluated (Phred &lt; 20, equivalent to a maximum of 1% accumulated error across bases). Besides, clusters with abundances lower than 2 were removed (in some protocols, this threshold is set at &lt; 5 to further reduce noise). Taxonomic ranks were allocated using a proprietary 16S rRNA sequence database (NeoRef, Neo -prospecta Microbiome Technologies, Brazil) set at a 99% identity level using blastn v.2.6.0 + (Altschul et al., 1990). The resulting oligotype tables, analogous to traditional OTU tables, were used for calculating α-diversity metrics using R (version 4.1.0) and the Phyloseq package, with normaliza -tion via rarefaction to a standardized sequencing depth (e.g., 10,000  sequences  per  sample)  or  cumulative  sum  scaling (CSS) to account for differences in library sizes. Relative abundance plots were made in R (version 4.1.0). Regarding species-level  resolution  limits,  the  V3-V4  region  enables reliable genus-level classification and species-level assign -ment  for  many  taxa  at  99%  sequence  identity;  however, it  may  not  distinguish  closely  related  species  in  all  cases due to conserved sequences in this ~ 465 bp amplicon, with

Fig.  1 a Rotarod  test  (latency  to  fall):  results  expressed  under  the parameter  of  latency  to  fall  from  the  rotating  cylindrical  platform in seconds (s); b Open field test (rearing number): results expressed under the parameters of rearing movements. c Open field test (crossing

PD-PREB PD-FLU

The  analysis  of  the  diversity  of  the  gut  microbiota  was computed by the Hill diversity series (Hill., 1973), where q  =  0 is the richness, q  =  1 is the Shannon's entropy, and q  =  2 is  the  Reciprocal  Simpson  index.  Beta  diversity  was  ana -lyzed using principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) to evaluate differences in taxonomic profiles between experimental groups. The PCoA was performed on log-ratio transformed values using Bray-curtis. The analyses were performed in R environment (R Core Team 2023), by the vegan package (Oksanen et al. 2020). The parametric data were analyzed by variance analysis (ANOVA one-way) followed by Tukey's post-test  or  Holm-Sidak  multiple  comparisons  tests.  The data were represented by mean ± SD or mean ± confidence interval, and probability values lower than 0.05 were considered significant.

## Results

## Prebiotics improved rotenone-induced motor deficit

Animals  induced  by  rotenone  presented  motor  deficits observed  in  the  rotarod  test  and  open  field  tests.  In  the rotarod  test,  one-way  ANOVA  showed  statistically  sig -nificant differences among the experimental groups (F (3, 34) =  7.587, p =  0.0005),  the  PD  group  presented  a  shorter latency  time  to  fall  from  the  rotating  cylindrical  platform (CONTROL vs PD, p =  0.0009,  Fig.  1 A),  indicating a  lower  locomotion  capacity  than  the  CONTROL  group. On the other hand, mice treated with FOS and GOS in the PD + PREB group presented a longer latency time than the PD group (PD + PREB vs PD, p =  0.0071, Fig. 1 A), indicating a greater motor capacity. Fluoxetine did not attenuate the number):  results  expressed  under  the  parameters  of  crossing  move -ments; The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-signifcant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; *** p &lt;  0.001 ( n =  8-10 mice/group)

Open Field - rearing number c)

Open Field - crossing number ns

Sucrose preference (%)

Sucrose preference test b)

200- motor deficit in animals in the PD + FLU group (PD + FLU vs PD, p =  0.45, Fig. 1 A). 100-

Two  parameters  were  evaluated  in  the  open  field  test: 1.  Number  of  lifts,  and  2.  Number  of  crossings.  Oneway  ANOVA  showed  statistically  significant  differences among  the  experimental  groups  in  terms  number  of  lifts (F (3, 32) = 8.975, p =  0.0002)  and number of crossings (F (3,  33)  =  10.45, p &lt;  0.0001).  The  number  of  rearings  was reduced in the PD group compared to the CONTROL group (CONTROL vs. PD, p =  0.0002, Fig. 1 B), demonstrating a loss in the natural exploratory behavior of the animals. The number of crossings was also reduced in the animals of the PD group compared to the CONTROL group (CONTROL vs PD, p =  0.0002, Fig. 1 C), indicating that the animals also presented difficulty in locomotion. However, treatment with prebiotics  increased  the  number  of  rearings  (PD + PREB vs.  PD, p =  0.0047,  Fig.  1 B) and the number of crossings (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0349, Fig. 1 C) in the PD + PREB group compared to the PD group, indicating an improvement in exploratory behavior and attenuation of bradykine -sia.  The  group  of  animals  treated  with  fluoxetine  showed no improvement in the number of lifts (PD + FLU vs PD, p =  0.1485, Fig. 1 B) or the number of crossings (PD + FLU vs PD, p =  0.8941, Fig. 1 C).

## Prebiotics improved rotenone-induced depressivelike behavior

Animals  were  evaluated  for  depressive-like  behavior  by sucrose preference and  tail suspension  tests,  one-way ANOVA showed statistically significant differences among the experimental groups (F (3, 22) = 12.58, p &lt;  0.0001) and (F (3, 36) =  7. 794, p =  0.0004), respectively. In the sucrose preference  test,  animals  induced  with  rotenone  showed a  sucrose  preference  of  less  than  60%,  while  animals  in the CONTROL group showed a sucrose preference above 80%.  This  lower  preference  in  animals  in  the  PD  group demonstrates an anhedonic behavior (another endophenotype of depression) of these animals compared to animals

Fig. 2 a Sucrose preference test: results expressed under the param -eter of the animal's preference for water with sucrose in percentage (%); b Tail suspension test: results expressed under the parameter of the immobility time of the depressed animal in seconds (s). The data

Tail suspension test nS

in  the  CONTROL group (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0002, Fig. 2A). In animals treated with prebiotics, sucrose preference was significantly higher compared to the PD group (PD + PREB  vs.  PD, p =  0.0154,  Fig. 2A),  meaning  that treatment with prebiotics resulted in maintenance of the animal's natural and healthy behavior of preferring the sugary liquid, with preference levels similar to those presented by the control group (&gt; 95%). As expected, treatment of sick animals  treated  with  fluoxetine  also  showed  an  improve -ment in sucrose preference (PD + FLU vs. PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 2A).

Regarding the tail suspension test, rotenone-induced animals showed a longer immobility time compared to healthy animals (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0159, Fig. 2B), indicating the development of despair-like behavior (an endophenotype of depressive symptoms). In animals treated with prebiotics, the  immobility  time  was  significantly  reduced,  indicating improvement of depressive symptoms (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0120, Fig. 2B). Conversely, the rotenone-induced and fluoxetine-treated  group  showed  no  significant  improve -ment  in  immobility  compared  to  the  rotenone-induced group alone (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.9817, Fig. 2B).

## Prebiotics increased serotonin and butyrate levels

One-way ANOVA showed that there were statistically sig -nificant differences among the experimental groups regard -ing to the levels of serotonin (F (3, 18)  =  6.583, p =  0.0034), serum and brain butyrate (F (3, 17) = 28.18, p &lt;  0.0001) and (F (3, 10) = 13.49, p =  0.0008),  respectively (Fig. 3). Rotenone  induction  promoted  a  decrease  in  brain  serotonin levels  compared  to  healthy  animals  (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0202,  Fig.  3A).  In  contrast,  the  serotonin  levels  significantly  increased  in  the  animals  treated  with  prebiotics (PD + PREB  vs.  PD, p =  0.0137,  Fig. 3 A).  As  expected, fluoxetine  also  increased  brain  serotonin  levels  in  the PD + FLU group (PD + FLU vs PD, p =  0.0059, Fig. 3A).

PD group showed reduced serum and brain butyrate levels compared to the CONTROL group (PD vs. CONTROL,

were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's  post  hoc  test.  NS:  non-signifcant;  * p &lt;  0.05;  *** p &lt;  0.001; **** p &lt;  0.0001 ( n =  5-10 mice/group)

5HT (picograms/mL)

Richness

Shannon's Exponential

AC

5HT

c)

Butyrate

Fig. 3 a Brain serotonin (5HT) levels; b Butyrate serum levels; and c brain butyrate levels. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-significant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; *** p &lt;  0.001; **** p &lt;  0.0001 ( n =  3-6 mice/group)

Fig. 4 Detrimental changes in the gut microbiota diversity in rotenone-induce animals. Alpha diversity: Richness, Reciprocal Simpson index, and Shannon's entropy index. Principal Coor -dinates analysis (PCoA). Alpha diversity indexes were determined by ANOVA one-way followed by Tukey's post hoc test. Values are presented as mean ± SD ( n =  5 cecal content/group). Different letters mean significant statistical differ -ence ( p &lt;  0.01)

p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 3 B; PD vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0205, Fig. 3 C, respectively). However, treatment with FOS + GOS increased  significantly  serum  and  brain  butyrate  levels (PD + PREB vs. PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 3B; PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0008, Fig. 3C, respectively). Similarly, treatment with fluoxetine promoted an increase in the serum butyrate levels (PD + FLU vs PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 3B).

## Prebiotics increased groups of bacteria producing short-chain fatty acids

Bacterial  DNA  present  in  feces  was  analyzed  through metagenomic  sequencing  analyses.  The  first  data  we  can extract  from  the  sequencing  and  identification  of  bacteria are related to bacterial communities' α and beta diversity; there was a clear trend towards a decrease in diversity in the group subjected to PD and an increase in the treated groups, although without significance (Fig. 4).

One-way  ANOVA  showed  statistically  significant  dif -ferences among  the  experimental groups about phyla Firmicutes (F (3, 30) =  8.422, p =  0.0003), Bacteroidetes (F (3, 9)  =  5.910, p =  0.0164), Proteobacteria (F (3, 30) =  5.966, p =  0.0026) and Actinobacteria (F (3, 10) =  11.85, p =  0.0012).  PD  group  showed  an  increase  in the  relative  abundance  of  the  phyla Firmicutes (PD  vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0252,  Fig.  5B)  and Proteobacteria (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0098, Fig. 5D) in the PD group compared to the CONTROL group. In contrast, PD group pre -sented a reduced relative abundance of Bacteroidetes (PD vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0159,  Fig. 5B)  and Actinobacteria (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0068, Fig. 5E) compared to the CONTROL  group.  Treatment  with  FOS  and  GOS  pro -moted a reduction in the relative abundance of Firmicutes

Treatments

Control

Butyrate ns

Fig. 5 Sequencing of DNA bacte- a)

rial 16 s gene in feces. a Distribu-

Fig. 5 Sequencing of DNA bacterial 16 s gene in feces. a Distribution of relative abundance among phyla: b Firmicutes ; c Bacteroidetes ; d Proteobacteria ; e Actinobacteria . The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA-statistical tests of variance and tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-significant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; *** p &lt;  0.001; **** p &lt;  0.0001 ( n =  5 mice/group)

Abundance relative (%)

Bacteroidaceae b)

ns ns

PO

Furthermore, one-way ANOVA revealed statistically sig- nificant differences among the experimental groups about

genus Bacteroides (F (3, 14) = 10.73, p=0.0006), Lactoba-

Bacteroidetes

cillus (F (3, 17) = 9.636, p = 0.0006) and Helicobacter (F (3,

Furthermore, one-way ANOVA revealed statistically sig -nificant  differences  among  the  experimental  groups  about genus Bacteroides (F (3, 14)  =  10.73, p =  0.0006) , Lactobacillus (F (3, 17)  =  9.636, p =  0.0006) and Helicobacter (F (3, 18) =  6.644, p =  0.0033),  in  the  group  of  animals  induced with  rotenone,  there  was  also  a  decrease  in  the  relative abundance of the genus Bacteroides (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0004,  Fig. 7 A and B) and an increase  in  the  genera Lactobacillus (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0186,  Fig.  7 A and C), and Helicobacter (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0068, Fig. 7A and D), compared to the CONTROL group. In con -trast, prebiotics increased the relative abundance of Bacteroides (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0398, Fig. 7 A and B) and decreased  that  of  the  genera Lactobacillus (PD + PREB vs.  PD, p =  0.0008,  Fig.  7 A  and  C)  and Helicobacter (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0051, Fig. 7 A and D). As with prebiotics, fluoxetine also reduced the abundance of the genera Lactobacillus  (PD + FLU  vs.  PD, p =  0.0011,  Fig.  7 A  and C) and Helicobacter (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0072, Fig. 7 A and D) but did not significantly alter the genus Bacteroides (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.3052, Fig. 7 A and B).

Fig. 6 Sequencing of DNA bacterial 16 s gene in feces. Distribution of relative abundance of the a Bacteroidaceae and b Lactobacillaceae families. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-signifcant; * p &lt;  0.05; *** p &lt;  0.001 ( n =  5 mice/group)

(PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0004, Fig. 5B) and Proteobacteria (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0027, Fig. 5D) compared to the PD group. In contrast, prebiotic treatment increased the relative abundance of the Actinobacteria phylum (PD + PREB vs.  PD, p =  0.0267,  Fig. 5 E).  By  its  turn,  fluoxetine  treat -ment increased Bacteroidetes (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0312, Fig. 5B), whereas it reduced the relative abundance of Firmicutes (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0009, Fig. 5A), and Proteobacteria (PD + FLU vs. PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 5D).

One-way ANOVA revealed  statistically  significant  dif -ferences  among  the  experimental  groups  about  family Bacteroidaceae (F  (3,  8)  =  20.28, p =  0.0004).  In  the  PD group,  there  was  a  decrease  in  the  relative  abundance  of the Bacteroidaceae family (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0004, Fig. 6 A). Opposily, prebiotic treatment increased the rela -tive abundance of both Bacteroidaceae (PD + PREB vs PD, p =  0.0196, Fig. 6 A). In contrast, fluoxetine did not signifi -cantly  alter  the  abundance  of  the  family Bacteroidaceae (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.5973,  Fig. 6A). In relation to the Lactobacillaceae family,  one-way ANOVA  did  not  reach statistical significance (F (3, 8)  =  2.878, p =  0.1031). In the PD group showed a trend to increase the relative abundance compared to the other group (Fig. 6B).

One-way ANOVA showed  that  there  were  statistically significant differences  among  the  experimental  groups regarding  the Alistipes  ssp (F  (3,  32)  =  6.820, p =  0.0011), Bacteroides  acidifaciens (F  (3,  32)  =  6.973, p =  0.0010), Helicobacter hepaticus (F  (3,  36)  =  4.864, p =  0.0061)  and Lactobacillus reuteri F (3, 34)  =  8.779, p =  0.0002) relative abundance.  We  observed  in  the  PD  group  decreased  the relative  abundance  of Alistipes  ssp (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0391, Fig. 8 A), Bacteroides acidifaciens (PD vs. CON -TROL, p =  0.0030,  Fig. 8 B),  and  increased Helicobacter hepaticus (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0220,  Fig. 8 C),  but did  not  significantly  alter  the  abundance  of Lactobacillus reuteri (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.9965, Fig. 8D). However, prebiotic  treatment  significantly  increased Alistipes  ssp (PD + PREB vs PD, p =  0.0073, Fig. 8 A), and Lactobacillus

Lactobacillaceae ns

nS.

Firmicutes c)

Abundance relative (%)|

Relative abundance (%)

Genus

Duncaniella

10- b)

C)

20- d)

Fig. 7 Sequencing of DNA bacterial 16 s gene in feces. a Distribution of  relative  abundance  among  genera: b Bacteroides ; c Lactobacillus ; d Helicobacter . The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statisti -

Bacteroides

cal  tests  of  variance  and  Tukey's  post  hoc  test.  NS:  non-signifcant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; *** p &lt;  0.001 ( n =  5 mice/group)

Abundance relative

Alistipes sp

Fig. 8 Sequencing of DNA bacterial 16 s gene in feces. a Alistipes sp.; b B. acidifaciens ; c Helicobacter hepaticus ; d Lactobacillus reuteri. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-signifcant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; ( n =  5 mice/group)

H. hepaticus

GPR43

DAPI

DP

DP + PREB

DP + FLU

Fig. 9 Representative images of immunofluorescence and optical density/pixels for GPR43 in the colon. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test ( n =  4-7 images per group). NS: non-significant; * p &lt;  0.05; *** p &lt;  0.001

E 400-

reuteri (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0019, Fig. 8 D), but reduced Helicobacter  hepaticus (PD + PREB  vs  PD, p =  0.0138, Fig. 8C). Fluoxetine  increased  the  relative  abundance of Alistipes  sp .  (PD  +  FLU  vs.  PD, p =  0.0013,  Fig.  8 A) and  decreased Helicobacter  hepaticus (PD  +  FLU  vs.  PD, p =  0.0194, Fig. 8 C) , but did not affect Bacteroides acidifaciens (PD + FLU vs PD, p =  0.9493, Fig. 8 B), and Lactobacillus reuteri (PD + FLU vs PD, p =  0.8053, Fig. 8 D).

## Prebiotics increased immunoreactivity of GPR43 in the colon

One-way ANOVA  revealed  statistically  significant  differ -ences  among  the  experimental  groups  about  the  expres -sion of GPR43 (F (3, 18) = 10.92, p =  0.0003). In the colon,

rotenone decreased the expression of GPR43, a receptor for short-chain fatty acids (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0353). In contrast, prebiotics increased the expression of this receptor, indicating a greater responsiveness to short-chain fatty acids (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0001) (Fig. 9 ).

## Prebiotics reduced α-synuclein, inflammation and intestinal permeability in the colon

One-way ANOVA showed that there were statistically sig -nificant differences among the experimental groups regard -ing  to  the  protein  levels  of  occludin  (F  (3,  11)  =  11.98, p =  0.0009), zonula occludens (F (3, 8)  =  8.538, p =  0.0071), α-synuclein  (F  (3, 4)  =  27.40, p =  0.0040),  p-NF-kB  (F (3,  4)  =  19.90, p =  0.0072)  and  IL1-β  (F  (3,  14)  =  19.77,

MERGE

B. acidifaciens nS

ns

60-82 kDa

220 kDa

18 kDa

65 kDa

17 kDa

42 kDa

CONT

100- c)

40- p &lt;  0.0001)  (Fig.  10 A).  We  observed  that  the  PD  group showed a reduction in occludin and zonula occludens compared  to  the  control  group  (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.058 and p =  0.0161, respectively, Fig. 10A-C), suggesting pos -sible damage to the integrity of the epithelium in response to injury caused by rotenone. Moreover, rotenone induced-animals showed an accumulation of α-synuclein in the colon (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0211,  Fig.  10 A and D), as well as an increase in p-NF-kB (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0084, Fig. 10A and E), and IL1-β (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0001, Fig. 10A and F). Prebiotics  significantly  increased  occlu -din  (PD + PREB vs PD, p =  0.0021,  Fig.  10 A and B), and zonula occludens (PD + PREB vs PD, p =  0.0087, Fig. 10 A and  C),  while  reducing  the  accumulation  of  α-synuclein (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0029, Fig. 10A and D), the expres -sion of p-NF-kB (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0149, Fig. 10 A and E), and IL1-β (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0234, Fig. 10 A and F). Fluoxetine-treated group showed no significant the protein levels of occludin (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0 0.9276,

PD + PREB

Fig. 10 a Representative images of western blot bands (Left panels), and western blot quantification of b occludin, c zonula occludens, d phospho-α-synuclein, e NFkB, and f IL1-β in the colon. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: nonsignificant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; *** p &lt;  0.001; **** p &lt;  0.0001; pooled samples of 10 mice/group; statistical analyses were performed using the values obtained in different replicates. f Immunofluorescence for occludin in the colon. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-signifcant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01 ( n =  5-7 images/group)

PD + FLU

Occludin nS

ZO-1

Fig. 10 A and B) and zonula occludens (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.2814, Fig. 10A and C), however reduced the expres -sion  levels  of  phospho-α-synuclein  (PD + FLU  vs.  PD, p =  0.0224, Fig. 10A and D), and IL1-β (PD + FLU vs. PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 10A and F), but did not significantly reduce p-NF-kB (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.2523, Fig. 10 A and E).

The  quantification  of  occludin  was  complemented  by immunofluorescence analysis.  One-way ANOVA revealed statistically significant differences among the experimental groups about the expression of occludin (F (3, 20) = 6.556, p =  0.0029)  (Fig.  10G).  Rotenone  treatment  significantly reduced the immunoreactivity to the junction protein occludin (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0465, Fig. 10 G). When compared  to  the  PD  group,  the  group  that  was  induced  with rotenone  and  treated  with  prebiotics  showed  an  increase in  occludin  expression  (PD + PREB  vs.  PD, p =  0.0019, Fig. 10G), as did the group treated with fluoxetine (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0145, Fig. 10 G). Ale

19 kDa

17 kDa|

135 kDa

65 kDa C

## Prebiotics reduced phosphorylated α-synuclein aggregation, glial reactivity and neuroinflammation in the substantia nigra CONTROL

Phospho-a-SYN

Phospho-a-synuclein

To  investigate  the  association  between  neuronal  dysfunction  associated  with  phosphorylated  α-synuclein  aggrega -tion,  we  analyzed  the  expression  of  phospho-α-synuclein, total  α-synuclein,  IBA-1,  iNOS,  p-NFkB  and  IL1-β  in the  substantia  nigra.  One-way  ANOVA  revealed  statis -tically significant differences among  the experimental groups about the expression of phospho-α-synuclein (F (3, 9)  =  12.96, p =  0.0013), total α-synuclein (F (3, 12)  =  48.24, p &lt;  0.0001),  IBA-1  (F  (3,  18)  =  12.98, p &lt;  0.0001),  iNOS (F  (3,  12)  =  9.209, p =  0.0019),  p-NFkB  (F  (3,  12)  =  11.22, p =  0.0008) and IL1-β (F (3, 11)  =  6.212, p =  0.0100). In the substantia nigra, rotenone induction caused an increase in phosphorylated α-synuclein in PD-induced animals (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0032, Fig. 11 A and B) and the expression of IBA-1 (ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule) pro -tein (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0070, Fig. 11 A and D), indicating an increase in toxic protein aggregation and reactive microglia, respectively. In addition, PD group animals also showed an increase in nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0468, Fig. 11 A and E), p-NFkB (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0048, Fig. 11 A and F), and IL1-β (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0166, Fig. 11 A and G), which are mediators of inflammatory pathways. Prebiotic treatment reduced the expression of phosphorylated α-synuclein (PD + PREB

Fig. 11 a Representative images of western blot bands (Left panels), and western blot quantification of b phospho-α-synuclein, c total α-synuclein; d IBA-1, e iNOS, f NF-kB and g IL1-β in the substan -tia nigra. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-signifcant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; pooled samples of 10 mice/group; statisti -cal analyses were performed using the values obtained in different replicates

Total a-synuclein ns

vs. PD, p =  0.0090, Fig. 11 A and B) and attenuated microglial  reactivity  by  reducing  IBA-1  levels  compared  to  the PD group  (PD + PREB  vs.  PD, p =  0.0012,  Fig.  11 A  and D). Finally, prebiotics also reduced the expression of iNOS (PD + PREB vs PD, p =  0.0017, Fig. 11 A and E), p-NFkB (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0012, Fig. 11 A and F), and IL1-β (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0214, Fig. 11 A and G) in the substantia nigra. Fluoxetine also reduced phospho-α-synuclein levels (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0028, Fig. 11 A and B), iNOS (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0075,  Fig.  11 A and E), p-NFkB (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0030, Fig. 11 A and F) and IL1-β (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0147, Fig. 11 A and G).

Furthermore,  the  analysis  of  IBA-1  and  GFAP  expres -sion  was  complemented  by  immunofluorescence  assays. One-way ANOVA  revealed  statistically  significant  differ -ences  among  the  experimental  groups  about  the  expres -sion of IBA-1 (F (3, 52) = 5.623, p =  0.0020) and GFAP (F (3,  40)  =  12.44, p &lt;  0.0001)  (Fig.  12 A  and  B).  Increased IBA-1 was also evidenced in the substantia nigra by immu -nofluorescence  analyses  in  the  rotenone-induced  group (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0047,  Fig. 12 A), while the prebiotic  and  fluoxetine-treated  groups  reduced  IBA-1  label -ing (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0327, Fig. 12 A), (PD + FLU vs.  PD, p =  0.0084,  Fig.  12 A).  In  addition,  there  was  also an  increase  in  glial  fibrillary  acidic  protein  (GFAP)  in the  PD  group  (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p &lt;  0.0001,  Fig.  12 B). However, prebiotics and fluoxetine were able to attenuate the immunoreactivity of this glial marker (PD + PREB vs.

TH

IBA-1

GFAP

45 kDa

60 kDa

43 kDa

14 kDa

PD+PREB

Fig. 12 a Immunofluorescence for IBA-1 in the substantia nigra. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of vari -ance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-significant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01 ( n =  12 images/group); b Immunofluorescence for GFAP in the substantia nigra. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of vari -ance and Tukey's post hoc test. **** p &lt;  0.0001. ( n =  12 images/ group)

p-CREB

Fig. 13 a Representative images of western blot bands (Left panels), and western blot quantification of b GPR109, c TH, d p-CREB and e BDNF in the substantia nigra. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: nonsignifcant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; **** p &lt;  0.0001; pooled samples of 10 mice/group; statistical analyses were performed using the values obtained in different replicates PD

PD, p &lt;  0.0001,  Fig.  12 B),  (PD + FLU  vs  PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 12 B).

## Prebiotics attenuated dopaminergic neuronal death and increased neuroplasticity factors in the substantia nigra

We employed western blot to evaluate the protein levels of the GPR109, enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), p-CREB and BDNF. One-way ANOVA showed statistically signifi -cant differences among the experimental groups regarding GPR109 (F (3, 8) = 32.73, p &lt;  0.0001), TH F (3, 24)  =  17.49, p &lt;  0.0001),  p-CREB  (F  (3,  10)  =  31.68, p &lt;  0.0001)  and BDNF (F (3, 10) = 31.68, p &lt;  0.0001) (Fig. 13B-E).

Analysis  showed  that  systemic  administration  of  rotenone  promoted  reduced  GPR109  levels  in  the  substantia nigra (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0070, Fig. 13 A and B). In contrast,  treatment  with  prebiotics  significantly  increased the GPR109 levels (PD + PREB vs. PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 13 A and B).

The  death  of  dopaminergic  neurons  in  the  substantia nigra  was  evidenced  by  decreased  expression  of  the  TH (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0038, Fig. 13A and C). However, treatment with prebiotics was able to attenuate dopaminergic neuronal loss (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0007, Fig. 13 A and  C),  just  as  fluoxetine  (PD  +  FLU  vs.  PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 13 A and C). Rotenone caused loss of neuroplasticity through decreased p-CREB (PD vs. CONTROL, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 13A and D) and BDNF (PD vs. CONTROL, p &lt;  0.0001,

PD+FLU

GPR109

BDNF

Fig. 13A and E). However, prebiotics increased the protein expression  of  p-CREB  (PD + PREB  vs.  PD, p =  0.0453, Fig. 13 A and D) and BDNF (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0453, Fig. 13A and E). Fluoxetine also increased the expression levels of TH (PD + FLU vs. PD, p &lt;  0.0001,  Fig.  13 A and C), p-CREB (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0237, Fig. 13 A and D), and BDNF (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0237, Fig. 13 A and E).

Considering the essential role of the TH, p-CREB, and BDNF pathways in the plasticity and function of dopaminergic neurons, an immunofluorescence analysis was also performed  to  evaluate  their  expression  in  the  substantia nigra.  One-way  ANOVA  showed  statistically  significant differences  among  the  experimental  groups  regarding  the expression of TH (F (3, 52) = 19.25, p &lt;  0.0001), p-CREB/ TH  (F  (3,  42)  =  5.134, p =  0.0041)  and  BDNF/TH  (F  (3, 33) =  21.11, p &lt;  0.0001) (Figs. 14 A and B). Analysis showed that  administration  of  rotenone  promoted  reduced  in  TH immunoreactivity in the substantia nigra of the PD group (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p &lt;  0.0001,  Fig.  14 A).  Treatment with  prebiotics  increased  TH  immunostaining  in  the  sub -stantia  nigra  (PD +  PREB  vs  PD, p &lt;  0.0001,  Fig.  14 A), as  fluoxetine  (PD + FLU  vs  PD, p &lt;  0.0001,  Fig.  14 A). Immunofluorescence  analyses  also  confirmed  the  results of  both  p-CREB and BDNF by western blotting. The PD group  showed  a  decrease  in  BDNF  (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 14 B) and p-CREB, although this latter was not statistically significant compared to the control (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.3265,  Fig. 14 A).  In  contrast,  prebiotics

Fig. 14 a Immunofluorescence for TH and pCREB in the substantia nigra. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: nonsignificant; * p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; **** p &lt;  0.0001; ( n =  12 images/ group); b Immunofluorescence for TH and BDNF in the substantia nigra. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. **** p &lt;  0.0001. ( n =  12 images/ group)

increased BDNF (PD + PREB vs. PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 14 B), and  p-CREB  (PD + PREB  vs.  PD, p =  0.0239,  Fig.  14 A) labelling. Similarly, fluoxetine, the gold standard for neu -roplastic responses, also increased both BDNF (PD + FLU vs.  PD, p &lt;  0.0001,  Fig.  14 B) and p-CREB (PD + FLU v.s PD, p =  0.0033, Fig. 14 A). The overlap between BDNF and p-CREB labeling and dopaminergic (TH) labeling confirms the  neuroplastic  response  of  dopaminergic  neurons  after treatments.

## Prebiotics reduced rotenone-induced neuroinflammation in the prefrontal córtex

Given the involvement of cortical inflammation in Parkin -son's  disease,  we  evaluated  neuroinflammatory  markers in  the  prefrontal  cortex  (PFC).  One-way ANOVA showed statistically  significant  differences  among  the  experimen -tal  groups  regarding  iNOS  (F  (3,  12)  =  25.28, p &lt;  0.0001), p-  NFkB  (F  (3,  15)  =  5.767, p =  0.0079)  and  IL1-β  (F  (3, 12) =  35.68, p &lt;  0.0001)  protein  levels  (Fig.  15 B-D).  The rotenone increased the expression of protein levels of iNOS (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p &lt;  0.0001,  Fig.  15 A  and  B),  phosphorylated NFkB (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0496, Fig. 15 A and C), and IL1-β (PD vs. CONTROL, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 15 A and D). However, in animals that were treated with prebiot -ics, there was a significant decrease in the expression levels of iNOS (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0001, Fig. 15 A and B), p-NFkB (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0062, Fig. 15 A and C),

132 kDa

42 kDa |

iNOS/B-actin

Fig. 15 a Representative images of western blot bands (Left panels), and western blot quantification of b iNOS, c NF-kB and d IL1-β in the prefrontal córtex. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statis -tical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc test. NS: non-signifcant;

and IL1- β (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0034,  Fig. 15 A and D). Fluoxetine also decreased the expression levels of iNOS (PD + FLU vs PD, p =  0.0492, Fig. 15A and B), and IL1-β (PD + FLU vs. PD, p &lt;  0.0001, Fig. 15 A and D).

## Prebiotics increased neuroplasticity in the prefrontal córtex

To  determine  neuroplasticity,  we  investigated  the  expres -sion of GPR109, BDNF, p- CREB, SERT and PSD-95 in the  prefrontal  cortex  (PFC).  One-way  ANOVA  revealed statistically significant differences among the experimental groups about the expression of GPR109 (F (3, 4) = 15.27, p =  0.0118), BDNF (F (3, 12) = 11.14, p =  0.0009), p-CREB (F (3, 8)  =  18.05, p =  0.0006), SERT  (F  (3,  8) = 13.53, p =  0.0017)  and  PSD-95  (F  (3,  12) = 6.971, p =  0.0057) (Fig. 16 B-F).  Western  blotting analysis  showed  that systemic  administration  of  rotenone  promoted  reduced GPR109 levels in the prefrontal cortex (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0210, Fig. 16A and B). Treatment with fluoxetine sig -nificantly  increased  the  GP109  levels  (PD +  FLU  vs.  PD, p =  0.0218, Fig. 16 A and B).

The PD group showed a decrease of phosphorylated CREB levels (cyclic-AMP response element binding protein) (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0168, Fig. 16 A and C), BDNF (PD vs. CONTROL, p =  0.0014,  Fig.  16 A and D), serotonin transporter  (SERT)  (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0023,  Fig. 16 A and  E),  and  PSD-95  (PD  vs.  CONTROL, p =  0.0169, Fig. 16 A and F). In contrast, prebiotics increased the levels of p-CREB (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0012,  Fig.  16 A and

* p &lt;  0.05; ** p &lt;  0.01; *** p &lt;  0.001; **** p &lt;  0.0001; pooled samples of 10 mice/group; statistical analyses were performed using the values obtained in different replicates

C),  BDNF  (PD + PREB  vs.  PD, p =  0.0039,  Fig.  16 A  and D), SERT (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0282, Fig. 16 A and E), and PSD-95 (PD + PREB vs. PD, p =  0.0073, Fig. 16 A and F) in the prefrontal cortex, indicating higher serotonin lev -els and neuroplasticity. Fluoxetine also increased p-CREB (PD + FLU  vs.  PD, p =  0.0008,  Fig.  16 A  and  C),  SERT (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0028, Fig. 16A and E), and PSD-95 (PD + FLU vs. PD, p =  0.0228, Fig. 16 A and F).

## Discussion

The  rotenone-induced  Parkinson's  disease  model,  which is  sub-acute and rapidly progressive, with high variability and a limited therapeutic window, making delayed interventions challenging (Betarbet et al. 2000; Cannon et al. 2009 ; Johnson and Bobrovskaya 2015 ). Accordingly, many studies using this model adopt early or concomitant intervention strategies (Zhao et al. 2017 ; Siracusa et al. 2020), with gut dysbiosis  and  inflammatory  signaling  occur  early  in  rote -none-induced  pathology,  supporting  interventions  during model induction (Dodiya et al. 2020). In the present study, we treated with a combination of prebiotics since previous studies corroborate the complementary and potentially synergistic effects of combining FOS + GOS, rather than each in isolation, in modulating the gut microbiota, short-chain fatty acid production, and behavioral outcomes, particularly in physiological or pathological conditions (Burokas et al. 2017 ).

iNOS

p-NFxB

75 kDa

95 kDa

GPR109/3- a ctin

100- ele

Fig. 16 a Representative images of western blot bands (Left panels), and western blot quantification of b GPR109, c p-CREB, d BDNF, e SERT and f PSD-95 in the prefrontal córtex. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA statistical tests of variance and Tukey's post hoc

The rotarod and open field tests are widely used to vali -date  experimental  PD  models,  in  which  bradykinesia  and postural  instability  or  loss  of  balance  are  pathognomonic features (Arab et al. 2021 ; Mendonça et al. 2022a,b). When treated with prebiotics simultaneously with rotenone, animals  did  not  develop  motor  deficits,  indicating  a  preven -tive effect of FOS + GOS on both parameters. To date, there are  no  studies  directly  evaluating  prebiotics  such  as  FOS and GOS in experimental model of DP. However, we can compare our results with studies that applied probiotics as therapy. Probiotics are strains whose function includes the fermentation  of  prebiotic  fibers  as  an  energy  source,  and some studies have shown that probiotics can attenuate or even prevent the motor symptoms of PD (Hsieh et al. 2020; Sun et al. 2021 ; Sancandi et al. 2023; Parra et al. 2023).

Αlpha diversity can be used to calculate species composi -tion within samples, including two-dimensional information on number and abundance, while beta diversity can be used to study species composition among communities (Parikh et al. 2020). In the present study, alpha and beta diversity did not change significantly between groups, although there was a trend for α diversity to decrease in the PD-induced group and a tendency to return to baseline levels in the prebiotictreated  group.  Despite  this,  rotenone  promoted  intestinal dysbiosis by altering groups of bacteria that play roles in intestinal homeostasis, while treatment with prebiotics promoted an increase in beneficial bacterial groups.

According to previous observations, the increased abundance  of  the Firmicutes phylum  is  associated  with  PD, whereas  the  abundance  of  the Bacteroidetes phylum  is reduced,  characterizing  a  higher Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes

BDNF/p-actin

test.  NS:  non-signifcant;  * p &lt;  0.05;  ** p &lt;  0.01;  *** p &lt;  0.001;  pooled samples of 10 mice/group; statistical analyses were performed using the values obtained in different replicates

ratio (Yang et al. 2018). The present results confirmed the increased abundance of the Firmicutes phylum in the PD group, which was reversed after treatment with prebiotics and fluoxetine. Our results also showed that PD group had reduced  the  relative  abundance  of  the Bacteroidetes phylum compared to the CONTROL group, confirming previ -ous data (Li et al. 2019a ). Accordingly, Unger et al. 2016a stated that the reduction of abundance of Bacteroidetes is accompanied by a reduction in SCFAs concentration in PD patients (Unger et al. 2016b ). In this study, we demonstrate that FOS and GOS trends increase the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes compared to the PD group.

The Actinobacteria phylum  includes  some  bacterial species related to the production of substrates for butyrate synthesis  (Rivière  et  al. 2016 ).  Interestingly,  the  present results  showed that PD group also showed a reduction in the Actinobacteria phylum, whereas the prebiotics reversed this taxon alteration. Moreover, a higher abundance of the genus Lactobacillus observed in the PD group agrees with data obtained in a meta-analysis of the intestinal microbiome of Parkinson's disease, in which the genus Lactobacillus and the family Lactobacillaceae were the most strongly enriched taxa in PD in the six clinical studies that reana -lyzed  (Romano  et  al. 2021 ).  The  intestinal  abundance  of Lactobacillus and other genera, including Bifidobacterium , also  have  been  positively  correlated  with  Crohn's  disease patients (Wang et al. 2014 ; Lewis et al. 2015 ). Lactobacillus strains are low abundant members of the gut human microbiota (5 to 0.1% of the proximal and distal gut, respectively), and their  abundance is correlated positively or negatively with human diseases and chronic conditions (Heeney et al.

2018).  Here,  we  show  that  treatment  with  FOS  and  GOs helped to maintain intestinal homeostasis by modulating the relative abundance of the Lactobacillus genus.

In  contrast,  a  low  abundance  of  the Bacteroides genus has been described in PD patients (Li et al. 2019b ). As gut commensals, Bacteroides spp. have multiple roles; they can protect from pathogens by mucins production and metabolize polysaccharides and oligosaccharides, providing acetate  and  other  substrates,  such  as  lactate,  for  butyrateproducing bacteria (Louis and Flint 2017 ).  The  PD group showed reduced abundance of the Bacteroides spp, which was restored by treatment with FOS and GOS.

Treatment with prebiotics also promoted higher levels of Alistipes ssp and Lactobacillus reuteri compared to the PD group , which are known to produce acetate, propionate and butyrate (Parker et al. 2020; Cheng et al. 2022; Frolova et al. 2022). A decrease in the relative abundance of these bacteria has been reported in PD models (Stewart et al. 2009 ; Van Kessel and El Aidy 2019; Hong et al. 2021; Huang et al. 2021 ).

L.  reuteri has  a  potent  ability  to  produce  tryptophan metabolites  that  activate  host  aryl  hydrocarbon  receptors (AHR) in epithelial tissue, which has been found to be essen -tial for promoting the intestinal epithelial barrier and control of opportunistic pathogens (Zelante et al. 2013). Other authors also showed that L. reuteri promoted improvement in motor function, reduced oxidative stress, and attenuated the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and striatum in a 6-OHDA-induced PD model (Nápoles-Medina et  al.  2023).  Moreover, these lactobacilli could be associated with producing SCFAs in the gut, particularly butyrate, through the fermentation of dietary fiber such as FOS and GOS. Thus, the increased abundance of the L. reuteri genus observed in the PD + Prebiotic group can be associated with improving PD symptoms and increasing serum and brain butyrate levels.

Helicobacter species are frequently used to model microbial triggers of colonic inflammation associated with devel -oping  inflammatory  bowel  disease  (IBD)  and  neoplasia (Chichlowski et al. 2008 ). Moreover, H. hepaticus induces α-synuclein  pathology,  gut  and  brain  inflammation,  trig -gering  dopaminergic  degeneration  and  motor  disorders  in mice with Parkinson's disease (Ahn et al. 2022). The results showed that FOS and GOS also significantly reduced the abundance  of  the Helicobacter genus  and Helicobater hepaticus , positively correlating with improving inflamma -tory and motor dysfunctions in the PD-mice model.

SCFAs  are metabolites responsible for maintaining intestinal  homeostasis  by  modulating  the  integrity  of  the epithelial  barrier  through  immune  regulation.  They  are energy  sources  for  colonocytes  by  activating  G-proteincoupled receptors (GPRs) (Mohamed Elfadil et al. 2023).

Activation  of  GPR43  promotes  intestinal  barrier  integrity through mucus production and the expression of tight junc -tion proteins (such as claudins and occludins), in addition to inhibiting the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and promoting the differentiation of regulatory T cells (Tregs) (Maslowski  et  al. 2009 ;  Sina  et  al. 2009).  Our  results showed that treatment with FOS and GOS strengthened the epithelial barrier, regulating the expression of occludin and zonula occludens, as well as reducing inflammatory cyto -kines through GPR3 signaling.

Butyrate serves as an agonist for GPR41, GPR43, and GPR109 (Siddiqui  and  Cresci  2021 ),  and  among  SCFAs, it  has  received  particular  attention  for  its  important  antiinflammatory  and  neuroprotective  effects  (Dang  et  al. 2021a ;  Mohamed  Elfadil  et  al.  2023;  Paiva  et  al. 2017 ; Getachew et al. 2020). In addition, butyrate also promotes the expression of anti-inflammatory factors through GPR43 signaling (Kibbie et al. 2021a ;  Dang et al. 2021b ).  Moreover, butyrate can enter cells through the solute carrier family 5, member 8 (SLC5A8) transporters, acting as a histone deacetylase  (HDAC)  inhibitor,  which  inhibits  NFkB  sig -naling and thereby inhibits inflammatory cytokine produc -tion.  According  to  in  vitro  studies,  butyrate  significantly decreased  intestinal  lamina  propria  CD4 T  cell  activation and  inflammatory  cytokine  compared  to  acetate  and  pro -pionate through histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition and GPR43 signaling(Kibbie et al. 2021b ).

Intestinal  dysbiosis  plays  a  relevant  role  in  promoting intestinal  and  systemic  inflammation,  promoting  synucle -inopathies.  Bacterial  endotoxins,  such  as  lipopolysaccha -ride (LPS), induce gut and systemic inflammation that alters the conformation of α-synuclein, promoting the formation of distinct pathological fibrils. These fibrils have a greater capacity  for  propagation  and  aggregation,  suggesting  that inflammation induced by microbial agents may accelerate the deposition of aggregates in synucleinopathies (Kim et al. 2016 ; Sampson et al. 2016 ). Beyond dysbiosis, rotenone promoted  accumulation  of  intestinal  phospho-α-synuclein and inflammation in colonic tissue with activation of NFkB and  production  of  IL1-β.  Inflammatory  markers  such  as IL1-β associated with phospho-α-synuclein inclusions have also been found in intestinal biopsies of patients with PD (Devos et al. 2013 ). Another study also showed that a PD model induced by rotenone (30 mg/kg/day) for 7 days also promoted intestinal inflammation through the production of IL1-β and p-NFkB associated with dysbiosis, which prob -ably contributes to the milieu intestinal inflammation (Zhao et  al. 2021a , 2021b).  Our  results  demonstrated  that  treat -ment with FOS and GOS, besides attenuating phospho-αsynuclein aggregation, also reduced the expression of NFkB and IL1-β, thus decreasing gut inflammation and maintain -ing gut immunity.

The  SCFAs  have  also  been  reported  in  several  studies to benefit the central nervous system (Lan et al. 2024), especially  for  their  anti-inflammatory  effects  and  mainte -nance  of  blood-brain  barrier  integrity  (Chen  et  al.  2017 ; Chakraborty et al.  2024 ).  Signaling  through  GPR109A  (a butyrate receptor) attenuates LPS-induced microglial reactivity and NFkB levels, which in turn reduces the expression of several inflammatory mediators, such as iNOS, COX-2, TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 (Fu et al. 2015 ;  Giri et al. 2019 ). Accordingly,  butyrate  reduces  hippocampal  microgliosis and improves depressive-like behaviors secondary to neuroinflammation (Yamawaki et al. 2018 ). Several studies demonstrated  that  butyrate  plays  a  role  in  neurodegenerative diseases including types of dementia such as Alzheimer's disease(Skonieczna-żydecka  et  al.  2018 ;  Marizzoni  et  al. 2020; Stadlbauer et al. 2020), and Parkison's disease (Qiao et al. 2020; Liu et al. 2024).

Interestingly, PD patients present lower concentrations of butyrate in feces compared to healthy controls (Liu et al. 2024), and similar results were reported from ALS patients (Rowin et al. 2017 ), and mouse models of AD (Tran et al. 2019).  Other  studies  showed  that  lower  fecal  butyrate  is linked to  epigenetic  changes  and  depressive  symptoms in PD patients (Xie et al. 2022).  Low butyrate levels  in  PD patients  are  associated  with  increased  'leak  gut'  and  gut inflammation  (Xie  et  al. 2022).  An  open-label,  non-randomized PD patients study showed that a diet supplemented with inulin, a fructan-type saccharide such as FOS, resulted in beneficial biological changes in the microbiota, SCFAs, inflammation,  and  neurofilament  light  chain  (Hall  et  al. 2023 ). The present results showed that FOS and GOS pro -moted a significant increase in serum and brain butyrate lev -els, as well as GPR109 brain expression, which may have attenuated neuroinflammation and depressive-like behavior.

We  also  found  that  rotenone  decreased  the  expres -sion  of  tyrosine  hydroxylase  (TH),  the  enzyme  involved in  dopamine synthesis, and increased the phosphorylation of α-synuclein both in the substantia nigra and colon. The decrease  in  TH  reflects  the  death  of  SNpc  dopaminergic neurons, a PD neuropathological marker, as it correlates to α-synuclein aggregation. The accumulation of α-synuclein forms cytoplasmic clusters called Lewy bodies within the remaining SNpc dopaminergic neurons (Colla et al. 2012 ; Choi et al. 2013). In addition, phospho-α-synuclein accu -mulation was also demonstrated in the gut of PD animals, which could reach the brain through gut-brain axis commu -nication  (Kelly  et  al. 2014 ;  Seo  et  al.  2023).  The  precise role of toxic forms of α-synuclein in the etiology of PD is unclear. However, data generated from in vivo and in vitro models show that aggregated forms of α-synuclein may con -tribute to the neurodegenerative process in PD by interfering with lysosomal and mitochondrial function, impairing

autophagy,  vesicular  homeostasis,  and  microtubule  transport.  Our  results  confirm  those  obtained  in  experimental PD models induced by rotenone in vitro (Shin and Chung 2020) and in vivo (Dodiya et al. 2020). Furthermore, for the first time is demonstrated that prebiotics and fluoxetine can reduce α-synuclein accumulation in the substantia nigra and colon of rotenone-induced animals.

Previous data from our group have already demonstrated that substantia nigra is affected by the neuroinflammation in this PD model (Mendonça et al. 2022a), and this data is also corroborated in other animal models (Sampson et al. 2016 ; Ma et al. 2023; Geng et al. 2023). Microglia are resident cells of the central nervous system, mainly responsible for the production of inflammatory mediators, and this produc -tion begins from the activation of the inflammatory pheno -type  of  microglia  (Gao  et  al.  2023).  Microglial  reactivity (microgliosis)  is  assessed  by  several  markers,  including IBA1 (Kustrimovic et al.  2018 ).  In  the  present  study,  we found an increase in IBA1 expression in animals induced with rotenone (microgliosis) and a reversal of this increase in  diseased  animals  treated  with  prebiotics.  In  our  study, prebiotics also reduced rotenone-induced astrocyte immunoreactivity.  Astrocytic  reactivity,  revealed  by  increased optical density for GFAP, is also part of a neuroinflamma -tory response. A recent study by Yin et al. 2023 studying an A30P-mutant human α-synuclein transgenic PD mice dem -onstrated that G-protein signaling 5 (RGS5) promotes neurodegenerative process through augmenting tumor necrosis factor  receptor  (TNFR)  signaling  in  astrocytes  (Yin  et  al. 2023). Interestingly, it is well-known that butyrate inhibits the  activation  of  NFκB  via  HDAC  inhibition  or  GPR109 signaling,  which  down-regulates  the  expression  of  proinflammatory cytokines (Fu et al. 2015 ;  Giri  et  al. 2019 ), and  promotes  the  expression  of  anti-inflammatory  factors (Dang et al. 2021a ). Therefore, prebiotic treatment reduced CNS  neuroinflammation  and  synuclein  aggregation,  pos -sibly  through  SCFAs  effects,  particularly  butyrate.  These results  align  with  previous  studies  using  other  alternative treatments in PD models (Cai et al. 2022; Mendonça et al. 2022b; Zamanian et al. 2022).

The  neuroinflammatory  component  in  depression  con -tributes  to  the  pathological  process  of  depression.  Neuroinflammatory  mediators  are  also  observed  in  PD  models with depressive-like behavior and contribute to the neurodegeneration  characteristic  of  PD  (Kamińska  et  al.  2017 ; Okano et al.  2019 ;  Zhao  et  al. 2021a ).  In  the  analysis  of depressive-like behavior, our data showed that animals with PD presented  lower  sucrose  preference  (SPT)  and  longer immobility  time.  Some  studies  have  already  shown  the applicability  of  paradigms  used  in  experimental  depres -sion  research.  In  the  sucrose  preference  test  (SPT),  anhedonia in the animal is measured by the reduction in sucrose

Rotenone

FOS/GOS increased

SERT

FOS/GOS decreased iNOS

Prefrontal cortex

Substantia nigra

Serotonin

BDNE

* P-CREB

consumption compared to basal levels; anhedonic rodents show decreased preference for the sucrose solution, probably due to a reduced sense of reward from the sweet taste, in  the  same  way,  the  antidepressant  efficacy  is  evaluated by the greater preference for sucrose solution (Wang et al. 2009 ;  Schintu  et  al. 2012 ;  Mendonça  et  al.  2022b,  a).  In the  tail  suspension  test  (TST),  an  endophenotype  called 'despair-like behavior' is evaluated, which is proportional to the time of immobility (Schintu et al. 2012). Our results demonstrated  that  the  rotenone-induced  PD  model  develops anhedonic and despair-like behavior or depressive-like behavior, confirming recent studies using 6-OHDA-induced PD models (Bonato et al. 2018 ; Vecchia et al. 2021). Our data also showed, for the first time, that prebiotics FOS and GOS were able to inhibit the development of anhedonic or despair-like  depressive  behavior  in  PD  rotenone-induced mice. Interestingly, prebiotics showed similar results to the fluoxetine used here as the golden standard for depression treatment. In addition, prebiotics also reduced iNOS, NFkB, and the inflammation mediator IL-1β and increased brain serotonin  and  serotonin  transporter  (SERT)  levels,  which the reduced levels are associated with depression (BorrotoEscuela et al. 2021 ).

In  the  present  study,  treatment  with  FOS  and  GOS increased cAMP response element binding protein (CREB), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95) expression in the prefrontal cortex, which were depleted by rotenone treatment. The role of serotonin in depression and the loss of neuroplasticity in a-synudein

the  prefrontal  cortex  are  related  to  depression  (BorrotoEscuela  et  al. 2021 ).  Previous  studies  have  shown  that increased neuroplasticity through phospho-CREB and high  serotonin  levels  resulted  in  improvement  in  spatial restraint stress (SRS)-induced depression in mice (Duman et al. 2016 ; Kraus et al. 2017 ; Li et al. 2019c). PSD-95 is a  key  protein  in  the  synapse  that  plays  a  vital  role  in  the PSD organization, regulation of receptor trafficking, synap -tic  plasticity,  neural  development,  and  cognitive  function. Furthermore, PSD-95 is associated with the improvement of depressive-like behavior in a model of depression induced by  maternal  separation  model  in  rats  (Deng  et  al.  2022). Taken together, FOS and GOS treatment prevented neuro -degeneration and improved neuroplasticity associated with depression  comorbid  with  Parkinson's  disease,  possibly through SCFAs effects, particularly butyrate.

Thus, FOS and GOS may be a novel nutritional thera -peutic  approach  for  future  interventions  in  the  treatment of depression associated with Parkinson's disease. Clinical studies  with  these  two  prebiotics  should  be  performed  to achieve human translational effects.

However, there are some limitations of the present study including the use of only male animals, the absence of quantification of other short fatty acids (SCFAs), the concomi -tant administration of prebiotics with model induction, and the  combined administration of  FOS and GOS instead of testing each prebiotic individually. However, future studies should  address  sex  differences,  treatment  paradigms,  and the individual contributions of each prebiotic.

Fig. 17 FOS and GOS act in the intestine by increasing the relative abundance  of  short-chain  fatty  acid-producing  bacteria  Bacteroidaceae, Bacteroides, Alistipes sp, Lactobacillus reuteri and reducing the pro-inflammatory  species  such  as H.  hepaticus .  The  prebiotics  also decreased α-synuclein, p-NFKB, and IL1-β, increasing occludin and GPR43 levels,  thus  reducing  gut  inflammation  and  permeability.  In the Substantia nigra, FOS and GOS increased the expression of TH

and brain neuroplasticity factors p-CREB and BDNF, in addition to reducing IBA-1, GFAP, p-NFKB, IL1-B, iNOS and α-synuclein. In the prefrontal cortex, FOS and GOS also reduced the expression of inflam -matory markers p-NFKB, IL1-β, and iNOS and promoted increased neuroplasticity  by  expressing  SERT,  PSD-95,  BDNF,  and  p-CREB. Finally, FOS and GOS also increased brain serotonin levels

## Conclusion

This  study  was  the  first  to  test  a  potential  nutraceutical strategy  of  FOS  and  GOS  in  a  model  of  Parkinson's  dis -ease, possibly mediated through SCFAs effects. The results showed that this combination improved motor performance and depressive-like behavior by improving brain serotonin levels  and  its  respective  receptor  (SERT). Treatment with FOS  and  GOS  increased  butyrate-producing  gut  bacteria and higher levels of serum and brain butyrate and GPR109 brain levels. Moreover, prebiotics reduced gut inflammation via NFkB inhibition and decreased α-synuclein deposition, whereas  they  increased  zonula  occludens  and  occludin, reducing gut permeability. FOS and GOS also reduced neu -roinflammation in the prefrontal cortex and substantia nigra and promoted neuroplasticity through increased expression of p-CREB, BDNF, and postsynaptic protein PSD-95. Thus, FOS and GOS positively  modulated  the  microbiota-brain axis and, therefore, may be used in the future as adjuvant nutraceutical strategies for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.  Figure 17  summarizes the  effects  of  FOS  and  GOS reported in this study.

Author contributions Ingrid Prata Mendonça: Writing-original draft, Methodology, Investigation. Rodrigo Soares da Silva: Method -ology. Igor Henrique Rodrigues de Paiva: Methodology. José Roberto Botelho  de  Souza:  Methodology,  Formal  analysis.  Christina  Alves Peixoto: Writing-review and editing, Supervision, Funding acquisi -tion, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

Funding The  Article  Processing  Charge  (APC)  for  the  publication of this research was funded by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento  de  Pessoal  de  Nível  Superior  -  Brasil  (CAPES)  (ROR  identifier: 00x0ma614). This work was supported by the Research Excellence Pro -gram-Instituto Aggeu Magalhães (IAM-PROEP#400208/2019-9), the Knowledge Generation Program of the Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (FIO -CRUZ; #VPPCB-007-FIO-18-2-17), the Institute of Science and Tech -nology of Neuroimmunomodulation (INCT- NIM; #465489/2014-1) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Develop -ment (CNPq; #301891/2022-2). This study was partially funded by the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education.

Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

## Declarations

Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.

Open Access This  article  is  licensed  under  a  Creative  Commons Attribution  4.0  International  License,  which  permits  use,  sharing, adaptation,  distribution  and  reproduction  in  any  medium  or  format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended

use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,  you  will  need  to  obtain  permission  directly  from  the  copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit h t  t p   : /  /   c r  e a   t i   v e  c   o m  m  o   n s  .   o r  g /  l i  c e  n s  e s  / b  y /  4 . 0  /.