## Introduction

Parkinson ' s disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by selective nigrostriatal dopaminergic loss and the formation of intraneuronal Lewy bodies resulting from aberrant α -synuclein aggregation. 1,2 Although the clinical diagnosis of PD relies on the appearance of motor manifestations, extensive neuropathological dissemination initiates decades earlier, posing a signi fi cant challenge for early diagnosis. 3 Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) represents the most speci fi c prodromal marker of PD, conferring over 90% risk of phenoconversion to α -synucleinopathies, predominantly PD, over a 14-year follow-up period. 4,5 In established PD, RBD also represents a prevalent nonmotor manifestation, affecting approximately 40 ~ 50% of patients. 6 Extensive studies have demonstrated that PD patients with RBD (RBD-PD) exhibit more severe motor and nonmotor symptoms, including pronounced autonomic dysfunction, earlier cognitive deterioration, and accelerated motor progression. 7,8 RBD is typically persistent in PD patients and may worsen over time. 9 For example, one longitudinal study reported that probable RBD symptoms disappeared in only 7.5% of PD patients during a four-year follow-up. 10 These fi ndings highlight the substantial heterogeneity inherent in PD pathophysiology and support RBD-PD as an aggressive clinical subtype. 8 However, its underlying pathogenic mechanisms remain incompletely understood.

One possible explanation for the clinical differences between RBD-PD and PD without RBD (non-RBD-PD) is the ' body- fi rst ' and ' brain- fi rst ' hypotheses of PD pathogenesis. 11,12 This model proposes that the RBD-PD subtype follows a ' body- fi rst ' trajectory, in which α -synuclein pathology originates in the peripheral or enteric nervous system (ENS) and subsequently ascends via the vagus nerve to the brainstem, particularly the locus coeruleus/ subcoeruleus complex, which is considered one of the core pathological nuclei involved in RBD. 12 The pathology then

1 Key Laboratory of Liaoning Province for Research on the Pathogenic Mechanisms of Neurological Diseases, The First Af fi liated Hospital, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China; 2 Center for Sleep and Circadian Medicine, The Af fi liated Brain Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; 3 State Key Laboratory of Medical Proteomics, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China; 4 Center for Clinical and Translational Medicine, Shanghai University of Medicine and Health Sciences, Shanghai, China; 5 Department of Clinical Laboratory, the First Af fi liated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China; 6 Interdisciplinary Research Center on Biology and Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Chemical Biology, Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China; 7 Shanghai Academy of Natural Sciences (SANS), Fudan University, Shanghai, China; 8 Transgenic Section, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; 9 Guangdong Engineering Technology Research Center for Translational Medicine of Mental Disorders, Guangdong, China and 10 Geriatric Neuroscience Center, The Af fi liated Brain Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

Correspondence: Yaping Shao (alanna\_s@foxmail.com) or Guowang Xu (xugw@dicp.ac.cn) or Weidong Le (wdle@sibs.ac.cn)

These authors contributed equally: Yaping Shao, Jing Wang

continues to propagate rostrally to more central structures, such as the substantia nigra, leading to the emergence of motor symptoms. 12 Conversely, non-RBD-PD may re fl ect a ' brain- fi rst ' subtype, in which pathological α -synuclein originates within the central nervous system and then spreads peripherally. 12 This hypothesis reframes the clinical distinction between RBD-PD and non-RBD-PD as potentially rooted in divergent pathogenic origins and provides a falsi fi able biological framework for mechanistic investigation. 13

Several lines of evidence support this hypothesis. PD patients with RBD exhibit increased phosphorylated α -synuclein pathology within the ENS. 14,15 Similarly, patients manifesting prodromal RBD demonstrate a higher prevalence of peripheral neurodegeneration, including severe constipation and enteric α -synuclein deposition. 1,16 PD-like gut dysbiosis has been identi fi ed at both the prodromal stage and in RBD-PD patients. 1,17 It has been reported that the reduction of butyrate-producing bacteria and the enrichment of proin fl ammatory Collinsella are observed in both idiopathic RBD (iRBD) patients and their fi rst-degree relatives. 1 Compared with non-RBD-PD patients, those with RBDPD exhibit increased abundances of opportunistic pathogens (e.g., Aerococcus ) and decreased abundances of bene fi cial taxa (e.g., Butyricicoccus and Faecalibacterium ). 13 These fi ndings suggest that gut microbiota dysbiosis and associated in fl ammatory cascades might contribute to the divergent pathomechanisms underlying distinct PD subtypes; however, the speci fi c molecular pathways mediating this gut-brain crosstalk remain poorly understood. The gut microbiota modulates host homeostasis and physiological processes primarily through microbe-derived metabolites, which regulate systemic in fl ammation and neuronal function. Our previous study revealed signi fi cant metabolic dysregulation in PD patients, including elevated levels of neurotoxic bile acids (cholic acid and deoxycholic acid) and decreased levels of neuroprotective ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA). 18 Notably, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from established PD patients exacerbated in fl ammation and neurodegeneration in A53T mice. 19 Compared to FMT from healthy controls, FMT from PD patients signi fi cantly reduced fecal UDCA levels and increased the abundances of proin fl ammatory bacteria such as Alloprevotella , Flavonifractor , Erysipelatoclostridium , and Subdoligranulum in A53T mice. 19 Moreover, a recent study revealed that the gut microbiota-derived metabolites, such as secondary bile acids and p -cresol sulfate, were enriched in PD patients with RBD. 20 These fi ndings highlight the critical role of gut microbiota -metabolite interactions in PD pathophysiology. Nevertheless, direct comparative investigations between RBD-PD patients and non-RBD-PD patients are critically limited.

In this study, we initially recruited PD patients with and without RBD, as well as matched healthy controls. Plasma samples from all participants were subjected to metabolomic and lipidomic analyses via liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry (LC -MS) and gas chromatography -mass spectrometry (GC -MS) platforms. Additionally, targeted pro fi ling of in fl ammatory and immune-associated proteins was performed on the majority of these plasma samples. By integrating metabolomic and proteomic data, we identi fi ed both shared and subtypespeci fi c molecular signatures across the two PD subtypes. We further elucidated the correlations between key metabolites and proteins, as well as their associations with clinical characteristics. Notably, key metabolic alterations observed in RBD-PD patients were subsequently validated in an independent cohort comprising iRBD patients, PD patients with and without RBD, and healthy individuals. The relationship between these metabolites and gut microbiota dysbiosis was also investigated (Fig. 1). To our knowledge, this study represents the largest comparative analysis of these PD subtypes to date. By revealing subtypespeci fi c molecular and biological pathways, we aim to identify candidate biomarkers and elucidate the distinct molecular mechanisms that may contribute to the heterogeneous clinical trajectories of PD.

## RESULTS

## Participant cohorts and study design

This study enrolled 424 participants from two independent cohorts comprising 135 RBD-PD patients, 127 non-RBD-PD patients, 30 iRBD patients and 132 healthy controls (Ctrl). In the discovery phase (Cohort 1), RBD status was evaluated via validated questionnaires (RBDQ-HK, cutoff of 18 for the diagnosis of RBD, detailed in the Methods section, Supplementary Fig. 1). The three groups, including the non-RBD-PD, RBD-PD and Ctrl groups, demonstrated comparable age ( p = 0.0632, one-way ANOVA) and sex distributions ( p = 0.9664, χ ² test). Patients with RBD-PD exhibited signi fi cantly greater motor impairment (Hoehn-Yahr stage, mean: 2.7 vs. 2.2; p = 0.0002), poorer sleep quality (PSQI mean: 11.4 vs. 9.1; p = 0.0005), and more severe daytime sleepiness (ESS mean: 10.4 vs. 7.7; p = 0.0009) than non-RBD-PD patients.

In the validation stage, an independent cohort (Cohort 2) comprising four ageand sex-matched groups (30 RBD-PD patients, 14 non-RBD-PD patients, 30 iRBD patients and 30 Ctrl subjects, all of whom underwent gold-standard video polysomnography (vPSG) assessment for the con fi rmation of RBD status) was included. As expected, we observed more severe RBD symptoms in both the RBD-PD and iRBD groups than in the non-RBD-PD group, despite seemingly comparable daytime sleepiness between non-RBD-PD patients and RBD-PD patients ( Table 1 ) .

## Plasma metabolic pro fi ling and quality control

In Cohort 1, plasma samples were subjected to comprehensive metabolomics analysis via both GC -MS and LC -MS platforms. This integrated approach identi fi ed 455 unique metabolite features (Supplementary Tables 1, 2). We additionally performed lipidomic analysis on 314 (Ctrl, n = 102; non-RBD-PD, n = 110; RBD-PD, n = 102) of the 320 plasma samples, identifying a total of 771 annotated lipid species (Supplementary Table 3 ) . The identi fi ed lipids spanned fi ve major categories: fatty acyls, glycerolipids (GLs), glycerophospholipids (GPLs), sphingolipids (SPLs), and sterol lipids (STLs). These categories encompassed 27 distinct subclasses as de fi ned by the LIPID MAPS classi fi cation system.

To ensure the stability of the entire analytical process and monitor instrument reproducibility, quality control (QC) samples were prepared and inserted throughout the analytical sequence (detailed in the Supplementary Materials). After calibration using multiple internal standards (ISs, detailed in the Supplementary Materials), the QC samples exhibited tight clustering on the principal component analysis (PCA) score plot. Moreover, more than 95% of the metabolites and 87% of the lipids achieved a relative standard deviation (RSD) of less than 30% in the QC samples. These results demonstrated minimal variability and robustness of the data generated from all three platforms (Supplementary Fig. 2).

## Metabolic signatures of PD patients

We initially performed orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) to delineate global metabolic pro fi le alterations across three patient groups. As illustrated by the LC -MS metabolomic data (Fig. 2a), distinct metabolic signatures were observed across the groups, indicating subtype-speci fi c metabolic patterns. Furthermore, compared with intergroup differences, age and sex strati fi cation had a minimal in fl uence. GC -MS metabolomic and lipidomic datasets demonstrated consistent alterations (Supplementary Fig. 3).

To identify differential metabolic features between the groups, we fi rst adjusted for confounding factors (e.g., diabetes, hyperlipidemia, anxiety and depression, and the use of anti-Parkinsonian

a Participants recruitment and data collection

Metabolomics

4A0S

Ctri

(n=102)

non-RBD-PD

(n=113) +s

RBD-PD

(n=105)

b Data analytical pipeline

Metabolome

Intensity

Proteome

PCR

C Multiomics integration analysis

Log2(non-RBD-PD/Ctrl)

Ctrl

(n=30)

(n=14)

iRBD

Proteomics

Olink Explore 384

A,

Pi

Fig. 1 Flowchart of subject recruitment and integrated analysis of plasma metabolomics and proteomics in PD patients. a Multiplatform metabolomics and proteomics were performed to pro fi le plasma molecular changes in patients with RBD-PD, non-RBD-PD patients and healthy controls. b A total of 455 polar metabolites, 771 lipid species, and 363 in fl ammation- and immune-related proteins were annotated. c By integrating multiomics data, PD-related metabolic and proteomic changes as well as RBD-PD-speci fi c molecular signatures were identi fi ed. d Following the validation of the RBD-PD-speci fi c metabolic changes in an independent clinical cohort, we integrated metagenomic data to identify the gut microbes and functional genes associated with these speci fi c, microbially derived metabolites. Ctrl healthy control, non-RBD-PD PD patients without RBD; RBD-PD PD patients with RBD, iRBD idiopathic RBD, FAs fatty acyls, GLs glycerolipids, GPLs glycerophospholipids, SPLs sphingolipids, STLs sterol lipids, OAs organic acids, AAs amino acids, Carbs carbohydrates, FFAs fatty acids, FAEs fatty acid esters, FADs fatty amides, LPC lysophosphatidylcholine, PC phosphatidylcholine, PI phosphatidylinositol, PE phosphatidylethanolamine, LPE lysophosphatidylethanolamine, BZs Benzene and substituted derivatives, AADs amino acids derivatives, DPs dipeptides, BAs bile acids, SMs sphingomyelins, CE cholesterol ester, GSL glycosphingolipid, DG diacylglycerol, TG triacylglycerol

inflammation

LPE

OAS

PE

| Table 1.                           | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   | Demographic characteristics of the subjects   |
|                                    | Cohort 1                                      | Cohort 1                                      | Cohort 1                                      | Cohort 1                                      | Cohort 2                                      | Cohort 2                                      | Cohort 2                                      | Cohort 2                                      | Cohort 2                                      |
|                                    | Ctrl ( n = 102)                               | non-RBD-PD ( n = 113)                         | RBD-PD ( n = 105)                             | p -value                                      | Ctrl ( n = 30)                                | non-RBD-PD ( n = 14)                          | RBD-PD ( n = 30)                              | iRBD ( n = 30)                                | p -value                                      |
| Age, years, mean (SD)              | 66.4 (7.0)                                    | 65.9 (8.1)                                    | 68.2 (7.0)                                    | 0.0632                                        | 63.1 (7.0)                                    | 62.8 (11.2)                                   | 64.8 (8.3)                                    | 64.8 (6.0)                                    | 0.7137                                        |
| Female/Male                        | 54/48                                         | 58/55                                         | 54/51                                         | 0.9664                                        | 9/21                                          | 4/10                                          | 8/22                                          | 8/22                                          | 0.9901                                        |
| Disease duration, years, mean (SD) | -                                             | 5.4 (5.0)                                     | 7.5 (5.0)                                     | 0.0002                                        | -                                             | 4.6 (2.9)                                     | 3.4 (3.4)                                     | -                                             | 0.1402                                        |
| H-Y staging, mean (SD)             | -                                             | 2.2 (0.8)                                     | 2.7 (0.7)                                     | 0.0002                                        | -                                             | 1.9 (1.4)                                     | 1.8 (1.1)                                     | -                                             | 0.9647                                        |
| RBDQ-HK, mean (SD)                 | -                                             | 7.4 (5.0)                                     | 34.5 (10.9)                                   | <0.0001                                       | 4.5 (5.1)                                     | 13.9 (18.1)                                   | 33.9 (23.1)                                   | 47.1 (13.7)                                   | <0.0001                                       |
| PSQI, mean (SD)                    | -                                             | 9.1 (4.4)                                     | 11.4 (4.5)                                    | 0.0005                                        | -                                             | -                                             | -                                             | -                                             | -                                             |
| ESS, mean (SD)                     | -                                             | 7.7 (4.8)                                     | 10.4 (5.8)                                    | 0.0009                                        | 15.6 (5.2)                                    | 18.1 (4.6)                                    | 17.2 (4.9)                                    | 13.5 (3.6)                                    | 0.0045                                        |
| History of diabetes, Y/N           | 22/80                                         | 15/98                                         | 14/91                                         | 0.1700                                        | -                                             | -                                             | -                                             | -                                             | -                                             |
| Hyperlipidemia, Y/N                | 17/85                                         | 19/94                                         | 16/89                                         | 0.9425                                        | 11/19                                         | 2/12                                          | 10/20                                         | 5/25                                          | 0.1859                                        |
| Anxiety or depression, Y/N         | -                                             | 21/92                                         | 21/84                                         | 0.7911                                        | 3/27                                          | 5/9                                           | 9/21                                          | 2/28                                          | 0.0213                                        |
| Anti-PD drugs, Y/N                 | -                                             | 87/26                                         | 91/14                                         | 0.0652                                        | -                                             | 12/2                                          | 25/5                                          | -                                             | 0.8406                                        |

Differences in age distribution among the groups were calculated via one-way ANOVA. Differences in sex distribution, history of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, anxiety or depression and anti-PD drugs were calculated via chi-square tests. For other continuous variables, differences between two groups were assessed via the Mann -Whitney test, whereas differences among multiple groups were assessed via one-way ANOVA. Y/N yes/no, Ctrl healthy control, non-RBD-PD PD patients without RBD, RBD-PD PD patients with RBD, iRBD idiopathic RBD, H-Y Hoehn-Yahr, PSQI Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, RBDQ-HK REM sleep behavior disorder questionnaire -Hong Kong, ESS Epworth sleepiness scale drugs) via logistic regression. Comparisons between the two groups were then performed via the Mann -Whitney U test, and all resulting p values were corrected for multiple comparisons. In total, 203 signi fi cantly altered metabolites ( q value &lt; 0.05) were found in non-RBD-PD patients compared with Ctrl individuals (Supplementary Table 4), 154 (75.9%) of which were also dysregulated in RBD-PD patients (Fig. 2b), indicating shared core pathophysiological perturbations in the two subtypes. Among the 203 differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs), the levels of 79 metabolites (e.g., lactic acid, aspartic acid, and lysophosphatidylcholines (LPCs)) were increased, whereas the levels of 124 metabolites (e.g., mannose and acylcarnitines) were decreased in non-RBD-PD patients compared with Ctrl subjects (Fig. 2c). These dysregulated metabolites were involved in diverse chemical classes, including fatty acyls, amino acids, organic acids, carbohydrates, and bile acids, with 99.0% (201/203) exhibiting consistent directional alterations across the two PD subtypes (Fig. 2d -g, Supplementary Fig. 4).

In addition to con fi rming our previously reported alterations, 18 including the depletion of fatty acids (FFAs) and acylcarnitines, the accumulation of proteolytic toxins (phenylacetylglutamine, p-cresyl glucuronide), and elevated bile acids, the present multiple-platform analysis revealed signi fi cant disruptions in energy metabolism in PD. This was characterized by the accumulation of glycolytic and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates (lactic acid, pyruvic acid, malic acid, fumaric acid and α -ketoglutaric acid; Fig. 2e) and the depletion of carbohydrate metabolites (mannose, ribose, sorbose, rhamnose, etc.; Fig. 2g). Additionally, we detected a marked reduction in tryptophanderived indole derivatives (indolelactic acid, ILA; 3-indoleacrylic acid, IAcrA; 3-indoleacetic acid, IAA; Fig. 2e) and disrupted amino acid metabolism in both PD subgroups ( Fig. 2f ) . These fi ndings demonstrate conserved pathophysiological mechanisms independent of RBD status.

## Lipid pro fi les of PD patients

Comprehensive lipidomic pro fi ling revealed 392 differentially expressed lipid species (DELs) in non-RBD-PD patients, of which 353 (90.1%) were similarly altered in RBD-PD patients (Fig. 2h, Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the majority of lipids were decreased in PD, with selective elevations con fi ned to speci fi c subclasses, including LPCs, lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs), phosphatidylethanolamines (PEs), alkyl-acyl LPCs (LPC Os), and several sphingolipid species (Fig. 2i). Class-level analyses revealed increased levels of total LPC and LPC O in PD patients, whereas the total amounts of other lipid classes exhibited signi fi cant reductions (Supplementary Fig. 5a). Subsequent strati fi cation by acylchain saturation revealed that the increases were con fi ned to saturated PEs, saturated and monounsaturated LPC/LPE, and polyunsaturated LPC species (Supplementary Fig. 5b, c). Furthermore, the ratios of polyunsaturated FFAs to monounsaturated and saturated FFAs were markedly decreased in PD patients (Supplementary Fig. 5d, e). These fi ndings suggest that aberrant lipid remodeling and impaired desaturase activity occur across PD subtypes.

Immune-in fl ammatory protein alterations in PD patients

Given the recognized role of neuroin fl ammation in PD, 21 plasma in fl ammatory proteins were pro fi led via the Olink Explore 384 In fl ammation Panel in 226 samples from Cohort 1 (Ctrl, n = 74; non-RBD-PD, n = 76; RBD-PD, n = 76). The OPLS-DA score plot clearly revealed separation among the groups (Fig. 3a). Following adjustment for confounders and using the criteria of q &lt; 0.05, VIP &gt; 1.0, and fold change &gt; 1.2 (or &lt; 0.83), we identi fi ed 34 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in non-RBD-PD patients (21 downregulated, 13 upregulated) (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Table 6).

Elevated expression of the proin fl ammatory cytokine interleukin-1 β (IL-1 β ) and the oxidative stress-associated protein neutrophil cytosol factor 2 (NCF2) was observed in both PD subtypes (Fig. 3b, c). Moreover, we found a marked reduction in the expression of immune-related proteins, including FLT3LG (fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 ligand), ADGRE2 (adhesion G protein-coupled receptor E2), and CLEC4A (c-type lectin domain family 4 member A), which were not previously reported in PD. MANF (mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor), a neuroprotective factor, was also signi fi cantly decreased in both PD subtypes. Two enzymes, KYNU (kynureninase) and PKLR (pyruvate kinase), which regulate tryptophan catabolism and glycolytic fl ux, also exhibited marked dysregulation. Pearson

1.09642 * t[2]

LC-MS

1O N

Ctrl vs.non-RBD-PD Ctrl vs.RBD-PD

non-RBD-PD vs.RBD-PD

Ctrl vs.non-RBD-PD Ctrl vs.RBD-PD non-RBD-PD vs.RBD-PD

e Organic acid

Indolelactic acid

4-Pyridoxic acid

3,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acic nurCHc deid

Iminodiacetic acid

3-Indoleacrylic acid

3-Methoxybenzoic acid ***[

Pyrophosphate

Acetic acid

Galacturonic acid

Abietic acid

3-Indoleacetic acid

PFOA

CMPF

2-Propenoic acid

3,4,5-TCA

Malic acid

Hippuric acid

Hypotaurine

Dioctyl phthalate

-Hydroxycinnamic acic

Indole-3-carboxylic acid

Glycerol 1-phosphate

Carbamic acid

Fumaric acid

\_actic acid

Glycerol 3-phosphate

Pyruvic acid a-Ketoglutaric acid

h Ctrl vs.non-RBD-PD Ctrl vs.RBD-PD

non-RBD.

A O

Ctrl Vs.RBD-PD

Ctrl vs.non-RBD-PD

correlation analysis suggested signi fi cant positive correlations between KYNU and tryptophan metabolites (kynurenic acid, KYNA; IAcrA and ILA; Fig. 3d -f) as well as between PKLR and energy-related metabolites (malic acid, α -ketoglutaric acid and lactic acid; Fig. 3g -i).

The functional annotation revealed predominant enrichment in biological processes, including the immune response, positive regulation of transcription by RNA polymerase II and cellular adhesion (Fig. 3j, k, Supplementary Table 7). These DEPs are primarily localized in the plasma membrane, membrane, and

Inon-RBD-PD

·Ctrl-F

Ctrl-M

Inon-RBD-PD-F

non-RBD-PD-M

IRBD-PD-F

RBD-PD-M

Fig. 2 Identi fi cation of differentially expressed metabolites and lipids in PD. a OPLS -DA model of two PD subgroups and control individuals on the basis of metabolic pro fi les via LC -MS (R2Y = 0.654, F factor = 11.36, p -value = 0). b Venn diagram illustrating the number of differentially abundant metabolites identi fi ed in the between-group comparisons. Statistical signi fi cance between two groups was assessed via the Mann -Whitney test, and the resulting p values were adjusted for multiple comparisons via the Benjamini -Hochberg procedure. c Volcano plot visualizing signi fi cantly changed differentially abundant metabolites in non-RBD-PD patients compared with Ctrl individuals. d Volcano plot visualizing signi fi cantly changed differentially abundant metabolites in the RBD-PD group compared with the Ctrl group. e -g Heatmaps of the relative concentrations of non-RBD-PD-related differentially abundant metabolites (e.g., organic acids, amino acids, bile acids and carbohydrates) and fold changes between the two PD subgroups and healthy controls. *0.01 &lt; q &lt; 0.05, **0.001 &lt; q &lt; 0.01, *** q &lt; 0.001. The q value represents the FDR-adjusted p value for multiple hypothesis testing. To better visualize the relative concentrations of the mean values of each metabolite in the different groups, Z score scaling was performed. The color scale in the heatmap represents the Z score. h Venn diagram indicating the number of differential lipids in between-group comparisons (based on Mann -Whitney tests and multiple comparisons correction). i Bubble plot of fold changes for differential lipids of non-RBD-PD patients categorized by chemical class. PFOA per fl uorooctanoic acid, CMPF 3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-propyl-2-furanpropionic acid, 3,4,5-TCA 3,4,5-trimethoxycinnamic acid, 1-ACCA 1aminocyclohexane carboxylic acid, Phe-phe phenylalanyl-phenylalanine, Phe-pro phenylalanyl-proline, Val-ala valyl-alanine, Pro-leu prolylleucine, CA cholic acid, GDCA glycodeoxycholic acid, TDCA taurodeoxycholic acid, DCA deoxycholic acid, GCDCA glycochenodeoxycholic acid, IPTG isopropyl β -D-1-thiogalactopyranoside, THBA 2,3,4-trihydroxybutyric acid extracellular region. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis highlighted cytokine -cytokine receptor interactions and key signaling cascades, including the PI3K -Akt, IL -17, NF -kappaB, MAPK, and TNF signaling pathways, revealing extensive activation of in fl ammatory and immune responses in PD (Fig. 3l, Supplementary Table 8).

Metabolic differences between RBD-PD patients and non-RBD-PD patients

To investigate subtype heterogeneity, we compared metabolic pro fi les between RBD-PD patients and non-RBD-PD patients. Logistic regression, adjusting for potential confounding factors, including history of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, anxiety/depression status, and anti-PD medication, yielded 110 differentially abundant metabolites (adjusted p -value &lt; 0.10, Fig. 4a). The Mann -Whitney U test identi fi ed 90 metabolites ( p -value &lt; 0.05, Fig. 4b), 74 of which overlapped between the two methods (Fig. 4c, d, Supplementary Table 9). Compared with non-RBD-PD patients and healthy controls, patients with RBD-PD presented more pronounced alterations in polar metabolites, including amino acids, organic acids, and secondary bile acids (Fig. 4d). In contrast, nonRBD-PD patients demonstrated greater dysregulation of lipid metabolism (Fig. 4c). To comprehensively analyze the metabolic pathways associated with RBD-PD, we focused on metabolites that exhibited progressive changes (Fig. 4d), which were involved mainly in amino acid metabolism and the one carbon pool by folate pathway (Fig. 4e). Compared with non-RBD-PD, RBD-PD exhibited signi fi cant accumulation of methionine, homoserine, threonine and 5-oxo-proline alongside a marked reduction in glycine levels. Furthermore, signi fi cant enrichment of gut microbiota-derived metabolites, 20,22 including secondary bile acids, 2-phenylacetamide, 2-hydroxyquinoline, p-cresol, p-cresol sulfate, p-cresyl glucuronide, and phenylacetylglutamine, was detected in RBD-PD patients (Fig. 4f). Additionally, RBD-PD patients presented signi fi cant decreases in acetylated amino acids (N-acetyl-L-glutamic acid, NAcGlu; N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine, NAcPhe) and tryptophan-derived ILA levels. After correction for multiple comparisons, 17 metabolites remained signi fi cantly changed (Fig. 4g, Supplementary Fig. 6), largely representing aromatic amino acid (ArAA)-derived microbiota metabolites.

## Proteomic differences between RBD-PD patients and non-RBD-PD patients

Following adjustment for confounders and univariate analysis, we identi fi ed 24 protein candidates differentiating RBD-PD patients from non-RBD-PD patients (Fig. 5a). However, none of these proteins remained statistically signi fi cant after correction for multiple comparisons (Supplementary Table 10). Given the exploratory nature of the study, we proceeded with Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, which suggested the involvement of the innate immune response, positive regulation of cytokine production involved in the in fl ammatory response, and positive regulation of IL-12 production. These DEPs predominantly localize to the extracellular space and primarily engage in protein binding activities (Fig. 5b, Supplementary Table 11). Reactome pathway analysis demonstrated signi fi cant enrichment of key pathways, including PIP3 activation of AKT signaling, the immune system, cytokine signaling in the immune system, and cellular responses to stress (Fig. 5c, Supplementary Table 12). Additionally, Pearson correlation analysis of these proteins revealed strong correlations, particularly among TGFA, NCF2, EGLN1, PIK3AP1, PSMG3, DNPH1, SIT1, SERPINB8, and PKLR (Fig. 5d).

## Correlations between proteins and metabolites

To further explore the interplay between proteomic and metabolomic alterations in RBD-PD patients, we correlated these DEPs with the most signi fi cantly altered metabolites shown in Fig. 4g via Pearson correlation analysis. We found that the levels of gut microbiota-derived metabolites (p-cresol, p-cresol sulfate, p-cresyl glucuronide, and phenylacetylglutamine) were highly correlated with the expression of key proteins, including the neuroin fl ammation-related marker CCL11 (eotaxin), the intestinal in fl ammation-associated protein SPINK4 (serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 4), the oxidative stress-linked protein NCF2, and the signaling proteins TGFA (protransforming growth factor alpha) and WNT9A (protein Wnt9a). Conversely, alanine was signi fi cantly negatively correlated with these proteins (Fig. 5e).

## Correlations between molecular signatures and clinical characteristics

We further investigated the correlations between RBD-PD-related metabolites/proteins and the clinical characteristics of patients. We found that the levels of heptadecanoic acid were signi fi cantly negatively correlated with the RBDQ-HK scores. Conversely, the levels of 2-hydroxyquinoline, p-cresol, p-cresol sulfate, p-cresyl glucuronide, phenylacetylglutamine and 5-oxo-L-proline were signi fi cantly positively correlated with both the RBDQ-HK score and age (Fig. 5f).

Similar to the metabolic fi ndings, the expression levels of proteins, including SPINK4, CCL11, and WNT9A, also demonstrated signi fi cant correlations with disease duration and age (Fig. 5g). Furthermore, the expression of proteins, including CD6 (T-cell differentiation antigen CD6) and PKLR, was positively correlated with the RBDQ-HK score, indicating their potential association with RBD-related comorbidities. Notably, proteins such as NCF2 and SERPINB8 (serpin B8) were positively correlated with ESS scores, indicating their potential roles in the pathogenesis of sleep disturbances.

1.26901 * t(2]

-Log10(q value)

non-RBD-PD [RBD-PD

FLT3LG

ADGRE2 ·

CDONI

CLEC4A3

KYNU. 1

MANF

-0.8-0.6-0.4-0.2 O 0.2 0.40.60.8

non-RBD-PD/Ctri

RBD-PD/Ctri

RBD-PD/non-RBD-PD

Ctrl vs. non-RBD-PD

Ctri vs. pRBD-PD

RBD-PD vs. non-RBD-PD

CTRC

KYNU

NCK2

CXCL6

FXYD5

IL7

CDON

TGFA

LY6D

IL1B

NCF2

Log2FCq value

· q&lt;0.001

N, KYNU

·0.001&lt;q&lt;0.01 · q≥0.05

Fig. 3 Identi fi cation of differentially expressed proteins in PD. a OPLS-DA model of two PD subgroups and control individuals on the basis of proteomic pro fi le (R2Y = 0.588, F factor = 4.23, p -value = 6.19E-009). b Volcano plot visualizing differentially expressed proteins in non-RBDPD patients compared with Ctrl subjects ( q &lt; 0.05, VIP &gt; 1.0, |FC | &gt; 1.2). c Heatmap visualizing the expression of 34 PD differential proteins across three groups and fold changes between non-RBD-PD patients and RBD-PD patients and healthy controls. *: 0.01 &lt; q &lt; 0.05, **: 0.001 &lt; q &lt; 0.01, ***: q &lt; 0.001. The q value represents the FDR-adjusted p value for multiple hypothesis testing. The color scale in the left heatmap represents the Log2 (fold change) of each comparison, whereas the color scale in the right heatmap represents the q -value. d -f Correlation analysis between KYNU and metabolites (kynurenic acid, 3-indoleacrylic acid and Indolelactic acid). g-i Correlation analysis between PKLR and metabolites (malic acid, α -ketoglutaric acid and lactic acid). j , k Histograms and circle diagram showing the GO annotations of the DEPs. l Top 9 enriched KEGG pathways among the DEPs associated with PD. *: 0.01 &lt; p &lt; 0.05, **: 0.001 &lt; p &lt; 0.01, ***: p &lt; 0.001. The p -values presented were unadjusted for multiple comparisons

~ KYNU

-Log10(p value)

Adjusted p value&lt;0.1 p value&lt;0.05 q value &lt;0.05

d 10-1

non-RBD-

Insignificant

· Histamine

EPE 18:0 sn-1

FFA 9:0

PC 22:4

\_PC 20:4 sn-2

Significance

Op value &lt; 0.05

p value &gt;= 0.05

LPC 20:4 sn-

non-RRBD.

Ctri VS tri vs.

RBD-PD vs.

Fig. 4 Metabolic differences between RBD-PD patients and non-RBD-PD patients. a Venn diagram of differentially abundant metabolites associated with RBD-PD in intergroup comparisons. Adjusted p values were derived from a logistic regression analysis, which was used to control for potential confounding factors. P values were calculated via the Mann -Whitney U test, whereas q values represent the p values adjusted for multiple comparisons via the Benjamini -Hochberg procedure. b Volcano plot visualizing differentially expressed metabolites in RBD-PD patients compared with non-RBD-PD patients ( p &lt; 0.05). c Heatmap of metabolites exhibiting V-shaped or inverted V-shaped concentration changes across control individuals, non-RBD-PD patients, and RBD-PD patients. d Heatmap of DEMs exhibiting linear level changes across control individuals, non-RBD-PD patients, and RBD-PD patients. The color scale in the heatmap represents the Z score. e Pathway enrichment analysis of the metabolites shown in ( d ). f Speci fi c metabolic pathways associated with RBD-PD. g The most signi fi cantly differentially abundant metabolites in RBD-PD patients compared with non-RBD-PD patients. *: 0.01 &lt; q &lt; 0.05, **: 0.001 &lt; q &lt; 0.01, ***: q &lt; 0.001. The q value represents the p -value adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing. CMPF 3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-propyl-2furanpropionic acid, TLCAS taurolithocholic acid sulfate, TLCA taurolithocholic acid, GLCAS glycolithocholic acid sulfate, FFAD fatty acid amide, 5,10-Methylene-THF 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate, THF tetrahydrofolate, Hcy homocysteine, ArAA aromatic amino acid, NAcPhe N-acetylphenylalanine, PAGln phenylacetylglutamine, Phe phenylalanine, PAA phenylacetic acid, ILA 3-indolelactic acid, Tyr tyrosine, Trp tryptophan

## Biomarker identi fi cation for PD subtype discrimination

We adopted a two-stage pipeline comprising random forest (RF) and binary logistic regression (BLR) to identify candidate biomarkers for PD subtype discrimination. Initially, the 42 metabolites that exhibited progressive changes in RBD-PD (Fig. 4d) were used to construct an RF classi fi cation model using 500 decision trees. The importance of each feature in classifying the two subtypes was quanti fi ed via the mean decrease in accuracy (MDA) and mean decrease in Gini (MDG) metrics from 999 runs.

The top 30 metabolites ranked by RF were subsequently identi fi ed (Fig. 6a, b) and subjected to BLR analysis. Using a forward stepwise selection algorithm, we identi fi ed an optimal predictive model consisting of a panel of 9 metabolites, including p-cresol sulfate, glycine, 5-aminovaleric acid, threonine, N-acetyl-L-glutamic acid, heptadecanoic acid, methionine, alanine and prangolarine ( Supplementary Fig. 7, Supplementary Table 13). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis of the panel yielded an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.826 for separating RBD-PD patients

Ctrion-RBD.

Alanine

RABGAP1L

GLOD4

SERPINB8

WNT9A

SIT1

PKLR

DNPH1 |

PSMG3

Positive regulation of cytokine production

Innate immune response nvolved in inflammatory response

Positive regulation ofTcell proliferation

Positive regulation of IL-12 productior

Positive regulation of non-canonical

Positive regulation of type Il interferon production

2 (8.33%) ns

Intracellular signaling by second messengers

Fig. 5 Proteomic differences between RBD-PD patients and non-RBD-PD patients. a Relative concentration changes across three groups and statistical signi fi cance in group comparisons for DEPs between PD patients with and without RBD. The color scale in the heatmap represents the Z score. b Histograms showing GO annotations for RBD-PD-related DEPs. *: 0.01 &lt; p &lt; 0.05, **: 0.001 &lt; p &lt; 0.01, ***: p &lt; 0.001. The p -values presented were unadjusted for multiple comparisons. c Reactome pathway enrichment analysis for the 24 DEPs identi fi ed in RBD-PD. d Pearson correlation analysis of the 24 RBD-PD-related DEPs. The color scale in the heatmap represents the correlation coef fi cient. e Pearson correlation analysis between 24 DEPs and 17 DEMs in RBD-PD patients. f Pearson correlation analysis between the top 17 DEMs of RBD-PD patients and the clinical characteristics of patients. g Pearson correlations between 24 DEPs associated with RBD-PD and the clinical characteristics of patients. *: 0.01 &lt; p &lt; 0.05, **: 0.001 &lt; p &lt; 0.01, ***: p &lt; 0.001. H-Y Hoehn-Yahr, PSQI Pittsburgh sleep quality index, RBDQ-HK REM sleep behavior disorder questionnaire - Hong Kong, ESS Epworth sleepiness scale, HAMA Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, HAMD Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, Chol total cholesterol, LDL-C low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, ALP alkaline phosphatase

NF-kappaB signal transduction

Cellular response to type Il interferon

TLR3

p-Cresol sulfate

Phenyl sulfate

Glycine

5-Aminovaleric acid p-Cresol

Threonine

Homoserine

2-Hydroxyquinoline

Heptadecanoic acid

N-Acetyl-L-glutamic acid

Methionine

PC 34:4

3-Hydroxycinnamic acid

Lauryl sulfate

Arachidonic acid

LPC 20:0 sn-1

Biliverdin

Thiamine

TLCAS

Tyrosine

Homocysteine

SM 34:1

N-Acetyl-L-phenylalanine

Phenylpropionylglycine

Edetic acid

Glutamine

Prangolarine

Heptadecanoic açid

Homoserine p-Cresyl glucuronide

Phenylacetylglutamine

Homocvsteine

Cholesterol

Thyroxine

3,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid

FFAD C22:2

Fig. 6 Establishment of a biomarker model to distinguish RBD-PD patients from non-RBD-PD patients. a Mean decrease in accuracy of the top 30 signatures identi fi ed by random forest. This metric represents the magnitude of reduction in prediction accuracy when a variable ' s values are permuted; a larger decrease indicates greater importance of that variable. b Mean decrease gini of the top 30 signatures identi fi ed by random forest. Variable importance is evaluated by measuring the total decrease in node impurity (calculated by the Gini index) resulting from splits over a given variable. A higher value indicates greater importance. c ROC curve evaluating the performance of the biomarker model in distinguishing between two clinical subtypes of PD. d , e Prediction probability and prediction accuracy of the classi fi cation model in distinguishing between two clinical subtypes. f ROC curve evaluating the performance of the classi fi cation model in distinguishing RBD-PD patients from Ctrl individuals. g , h Prediction probability and prediction accuracy of the classi fi cation model in distinguishing RBD-PD patients and Ctrl subjects. i Pearson correlation between the levels of metabolites and 24 DEPs. j Pearson correlation of the levels of metabolites and clinical parameters. *: 0.01 &lt; p &lt; 0.05, **: 0.001 &lt; p &lt; 0.01, ***: p &lt; 0.001. TLCAS taurolithocholic acid sulfate, FFAD fatty acid amide, NAcGlu Nacetyl-glutamic acid

from non-RBD-PD patients, with 74.3% sensitivity and 81.4% speci fi city. The predictive accuracies were 80.5% and 74.3% for the two subtypes, respectively (Fig. 6c -e). Furthermore, we evaluated the panel ' s performance in distinguishing RBD-PD patients from Ctrl, which resulted in an AUC of 0.905, with a sensitivity of 88.6% and a speci fi city of 75.5%. The predictive accuracies for the Ctrl and RBD-PD patients were 78.4% and 82.9%, respectively (Fig. 6f -h, Supplementary Table 14).

To obtain a robust and unbiased estimate of the model ' s predictive performance, we performed an iterative leave-groupout cross-validation analysis. Following 1000 cross-validation runs, the biomarker panel achieved a mean AUC of 0.787, with a mean sensitivity of 74.0% and speci fi city of 69.9% for distinguishing PD subtypes, and a mean AUC of 0.873 (76.7% sensitivity, 79.7% speci fi city) for distinguishing RBD-PD patients from Ctrl. Moreover, six metabolites in the panel (excluding 5-aminovaleric acid, threonine and glycine) were signi fi cantly correlated with the RBD-PD-related DEPs (Fig. 5e, Fig. 6i), and eight (excluding alanine)

were signi fi cantly correlated with the clinical sleep parameters, particularly the RBDQ-HK scores (Fig. 5f, Fig. 6j).

## Validation in an independent cohort

In an independent clinical cohort (Cohort 2) comprising vPSGcon fi rmed patients with non-RBD-PD, RBD-PD, or iRBD and healthy controls, 10 of the 17 top metabolites identi fi ed from Cohort 1 exhibited consistent trends (Supplementary Table 15). Notably, 5 of these metabolites, including p-cresol, p-cresol sulfate, p-cresyl glucuronide, phenylacetylglutamine and 5-oxo-L-proline, were signi fi cantly increased in both the RBD-PD and iRBD patients (Fig. 7a, b).

We then evaluated the 9-metabolite model in Cohort 2, which yielded excellent performance in distinguishing RBD-PD patients from non-RBD-PD patients, achieving an AUC of 0.967 (90.0% sensitivity, 100% speci fi city), with predictive accuracies of 85.7% (non-RBD-PD patients) and 93.3% (RBD-PD patients) (Fig. 7c -e, Supplementary Table 16). When distinguishing RBD-PD patients

C non-RBD-PD vs. RBD-PD Ol Prediction probability

Prediction accuracy

- non-RBD-PD

· RBD-PD

Cohort 1

p-Cresol

0.3- ns

Cohort 2

ns

0.0- non-RBD-PD

C non-RBD-PD vs. RBD-PD Cl Prediction probability e Prediction accuracy

AUC=0.967

Sensitivity=90.0%

Specificity=100%

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 non-RBD-PD RBD-PD

1-Specificity tured

p-Cresyl glucuronide

Lactobacillus crispatus

Flintibacter muris

Marasmitruncus massiliensis uncultured Pseudoflavonifractor sp.

| Pseudoflavoni

Fig. 7 Biomarker validation and correlations with the gut microbiota. a , b Box-and-whisker plots showing the relative concentrations of pcresol, p-cresol sulfate, p-cresyl glucuronide, phenylacetylglutamine, and 5-oxo-L-proline across groups in Cohorts 1 and 2. c ROC curve evaluating the performance of the biomarker model in distinguishing between two clinical subtypes in Cohort 2. d , e Prediction probability and prediction accuracy of the classi fi cation model in distinguishing between two clinical subtypes in Cohort 2. f ROC curve evaluating the performance of the classi fi cation model in distinguishing RBD-PD from Ctrl in Cohort 2. g , h Prediction probability and prediction accuracy of the classi fi cation model in distinguishing RBD-PD from Ctrl in Cohort 2. i Spearman correlation analysis between metabolite levels and the abundance of the top 16 signi fi cantly altered microbial species. j Spearman correlation analysis between metabolite levels and the abundance of the top 38 signi fi cantly altered functional genes. *: 0.01 &lt; p &lt; 0.05, **: 0.001 &lt; p &lt; 0.01, ***: p &lt; 0.001

from controls, the model yielded an AUC of 0.801 (73.3% sensitivity, 76.7% speci fi city), with predictive accuracies of 76.7% (Ctrl) and 73.3% (RBD-PD) (Fig. 7f -h, Supplementary Table 17).

Associations between gut microbial dysbiosis and metabolic pro fi les

Additionally, we performed metagenomic sequencing in 73 participants from Cohort 2. We fi rst identi fi ed the top 16 microbial species that were signi fi cantly differentially abundant in both the RBD-PD and iRBD groups ( Supplementary Table 18, details in the Methods section). Correlation analysis revealed that the relative abundances of these microbial species were signi fi cantly correlated with the levels of key RBD-PD metabolites. This was particularly evident for species such as Lactobacillus crispatus , uncultured

Pseudo fl avonifractor sp ., Marasmitruncus massiliensis , Flintibacter muris , Clostridiales bacterium GWC2\_40\_7 , and Paenibacillus fl agellatus (Fig. 7i). Furthermore, we identi fi ed the top 38 functional genes (KEGG orthologs, KOs) that were signi fi cantly dysregulated in both the RBD-PD and iRBD groups (Supplementary Table 19, details in the Methods section). Notably, these key metabolites were signi fi cantly negatively correlated with K21556 ( malR , CRP/FNR family transcriptional regulator) and K01181 ( xynA , endo-1,4-betaxylanase), which were signi fi cantly downregulated in both RBD-PD and iRBD. In contrast, signi fi cant positive correlations were detected between metabolites and functional genes involved in ATP-binding cassette transport (K02031, K02032), peptide and amino acid degradation (K01426, K18123, and K01269), and mucus degradation (K01628, K01207, and K01820; Fig. 7j).

€ 1.0- p-Cresol sulfate

Hg/mL

proline

## DISCUSSION

Abnormal metabolism

of ArAAs

Glucose

(HK2

Glucose-6P

Although multiomics technologies, including metabolomics, proteomics and microbiomics, have substantially advanced our understanding of PD, several challenges remain. Differences in analytical platforms lead to inconsistent molecular coverage across studies, leaving many PD-associated metabolites, proteins and their interactions unresolved. Moreover, the differential molecular signatures distinguishing PD patients with and without RBD, as well as their roles in subtype-speci fi c pathophysiology, have not been fully elucidated.

In this study, we integrated multiplatform metabolomics and proteomics to pro fi le plasma molecular changes in patients with RBD-PD, non-RBD-PD, and healthy controls. This integrative approach revealed marked metabolic reprogramming and dysregulated immunoin fl ammatory responses in PD. Furthermore, we identi fi ed subtype-speci fi c molecular alterations, most notably the accumulation of gut-derived proteolytic toxins in RBD-PD patients. On the basis of these signatures, we constructed a robust biomarker panel capable of stratifying PD subtypes. These fi ndings provide a framework for unraveling PD heterogeneity and highlighting biologically relevant molecular differences across subtypes.

Both RBD-PD and non-RBD-PD patients presented substantial metabolic and proteomic abnormalities (Fig. 8). These common changes are closely associated with their overlapping pathophysiological features, including α -synuclein aggregation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and neuroin fl ammation. Mitochondrial dysfunction is well recognized in PD, 23 and brain glucose hypometabolism has been reported, even in the early stages of PD. 24 -26 We found that the levels of metabolites in the TCA cycle were signi fi cantly increased in both PD subtypes (Fig. 2e). This fi nding is consistent with the previously reported downregulation non-RBD-PD type

Lipid remodeling of key metabolic enzymes in the TCA cycle, including pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), isocitrate dehydrogenase 3 α (IDH3A), citrate synthase (CS), and α -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (KGDH), in multiple brain regions of PD patients. 27 These fi ndings suggest that impaired TCA cycle fl ux in PD patients might pathologically contribute to the accumulation of upstream intermediates.

Conversely, prior work has demonstrated increased expression of hexokinases (HK2 and HK3) in the substantia nigra pars compacta of both PD patients and the MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine)-induced mouse model, 26,28 supporting a metabolic shift from the TCA cycle to glycolysis in PD. This Warburg-like shift in metabolism can be triggered by the loss of mitochondrial complex I (MCI) function resulting from Ndufs2 deletion in dopaminergic neurons. 29 While this adaptation transiently sustains neuronal viability, it can ultimately trigger a progressive loss of the dopaminergic phenotype. 29 Furthermore, the accumulation of lactic acid and TCA cycle intermediates can instigate a feedforward cascade that exacerbates neurodegenerative progression. It has been reported that mitochondrial fumaric acid inhibits PINK1-Parkin-mediated mitophagy through the succination of speci fi c cysteine residues, which disrupts Parkin function and induces PD-related phenotypes. 30 Notably, targeted modulation of TCA cycle enzymes such as KGDH has been demonstrated to reduce lipid peroxidation and suppress α -synuclein phosphorylation, 23 indicating the therapeutic potential of metabolic interventions in PD.

The coupling between the TCA cycle and the urea cycle is critically important for ammonia detoxi fi cation and energy homeostasis regulation. 31 Our fi ndings revealed signi fi cant increases in the levels of urea and urea cycle metabolites (e.g., ornithine, aspartic acid, asparagine and glutamic acid; Fig. 2f, Supplementary Fig. 4c). This urea cycle dysfunction can directly

Fig. 8 Schematic illustration of metabolic pathway dysregulation in PD subtypes. Both RBD-PD patients and non-RBD-PD patients exhibit substantial shared alterations at the metabolic and proteomic levels, which are closely associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and neuroin fl ammatory processes. The signi fi cant downregulation of key metabolic enzymes and the accumulation of metabolites in the TCA cycle suggest impaired TCA cycle fl ux in PD. Signi fi cant increases in urea and urea cycle metabolites may directly induce systemic ammonia accumulation, which subsequently inhibits KGDH activity. Additionally, this study demonstrated that RBD-PD patients exhibit distinctive metabolic features, including impaired glutathione synthesis and gut microbiota dysbiosis-derived accumulation of toxic ArAA degradation products, as well as exacerbated immune dysfunction and in fl ammatory activation. In contrast, non-RBD-PD patients demonstrated more substantial dysregulation of lipid metabolism. ArAA aromatic amino acids, Glucose-6P glucose 6-phosphate, Fructose-6P fructose 6phosphate; OAA oxaloacetate. Figure 8 was generated via BioRender (https://www.biorender.com)

induce systemic ammonia accumulation, which subsequently inhibits KGDH activity. 32 Moreover, impairment of the TCA cycle leads to ATP depletion, further compromising the ammonia detoxi fi cation capacity and establishing a vicious cycle. 33 Furthermore, activated microglia generate excessive nitric oxide, which can suppress MCI activity and compete with urea cycle-derived arginine. 34 This competition may disrupt polyamine metabolism, thereby accelerating α -synuclein aggregation. 35 -37 Additionally, the pathological accumulation of excitatory amino acids (glutamic acid and aspartic acid) resulting from urea cycle impairment leads to aberrant overactivation of NMDA and AMPA receptors, triggering dysregulated calcium in fl ux. 38 The resulting calcium dyshomeostasis further contributes to mitochondrial dysfunction, excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and oxidative stress, collectively driving the degeneration and death of dopaminergic neurons. 38

Lipid metabolism dysregulation was another prominent shared feature in both PD subtypes observed in this study. Notably, most lipid species exhibited signi fi cant reductions across both subtypes, whereas the majority of LPCs and LPEs were markedly elevated (Fig. 2i, Supplementary Fig. 5a -c), indicating substantial lipid remodeling. A recent study reported that LPC can disrupt the autophagolysosomal pathway and lysosomal acidi fi cation by activating cleaved caspase-3 via the orphan receptor GPR35-ERK signaling pathway, further exacerbating the accumulation of toxic α -synuclein. 39 Given that lipids constitute fundamental structural components of biological membranes, lipid remodeling in PD can profoundly affect membrane architecture, functionality, and fl uidity. Consistently, GO functional annotation demonstrated that the majority of DEPs associated with PD are localized to membrane compartments. In particular, proteins, including PIK3AP1 and PLA2G4A (Fig. 3c), which are involved in phospholipid metabolism, membrane assembly, and intracellular membrane traf fi cking, were reported to be differentially expressed in PD for the fi rst time in this study. Although direct evidence is lacking, a study reported that loss of function of PLA2G6, a homolog of PLA2G4A, can impair synaptic transmission and lead to neurodegeneration. 40 PIK3AP1 serves as a negative regulator of the PI3K-AKT pathway. 41 This unique transmembrane protein can inhibit PI3K signaling by inducing proteasomal degradation of PIK3R3. 41 The PI3K-AKT pathway is recognized as neuroprotective against the development and progression of PD and is involved in multiple cellular processes, such as ERK signaling, oxidative stress regulation, endoplasmic reticulum stress, calcium homeostasis, and autophagy. 42,43 Multiple natural products, such as curcumin and quercetin, have exhibited neuroprotective effects by activating the PI3K-AKT pathway. 42,44 Therefore, pharmacological targeting of PIK3AP1 to restore PI3K-AKT signaling might represent a novel therapeutic strategy.

In addition to the shared alterations, we identi fi ed distinct molecular differences between RBD-PD and non-RBD-PD. The non-RBD-PD subtype exhibited more pronounced lipidomic perturbations, characterized by signi fi cant elevations in LPCs, along with marked reductions in phospholipids and polyunsaturated FFAs. Conversely, the RBD-PD subtype demonstrated an exacerbated accumulation of gut-derived toxic metabolites and impairment of glutathione (GSH) synthesis (Fig. 8).

Substantial evidence indicates marked GSH depletion in PD brains, particularly in the substantia nigra pars compacta, a pathological change notably preceding clinical symptom manifestation. 45,46 Our metabolomic pro fi ling revealed decreased levels of glycine, a critical precursor for GSH synthesis, in PD patients, especially in those with RBD-PD. Glycine de fi ciency and the subsequent decrease in GSH production lead to the accumulation of γ -glutamyl-cysteine. 47 This intermediate is subsequently shunted by γ -glutamyl-cyclotransferase, leading to increased production of 5-oxo-L-proline, which is a hallmark of impaired de novo GSH biosynthesis. 47 Notably, our metagenomic analysis revealed that gut dysbiosis in patients with RBD-PD and iRBD leads to the upregulation of K00282 ( gcvPA , glycine dehydrogenase subunit 1) and K00283 ( gcvPB , glycine dehydrogenase subunit 2), two functional genes involved in the glycine degradation pathway (Fig. 7j). The abundance of these two functional genes was signi fi cantly correlated with the 5-oxo-Lproline level. These fi ndings suggest that the functional dysbiosis of the gut microbiome also contributes to the observed impairment in GSH synthesis. Since GSH is the primary endogenous antioxidant and pivotal scavenger of ROS, its depletion triggers a cascade of exacerbated oxidative stress, which induces progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. 48 This fi nding is in line with the elevated expression of NCF2 observed in RBD-PD patients. NCF2 serves as an essential component of the NADPH oxidase complex, which critically regulates the generation of ROS. 49 The present study revealed for the fi rst time that the expression of NCF2 is signi fi cantly increased in the RBD-PD subtype. Although direct evidence remains unavailable, a previous study reported that the expression of the NCF2 gene is downregulated in PD patients but upregulated in patients with in fl ammatory bowel disease. 49 The overexpression of NCF2 in RBD-PD patients may therefore be closely related to the gastrointestinal dysfunction observed in this subtype.

Another key fi nding was the remarkable elevation of gut microbiota-derived metabolites in RBD-PD, such as the tyrosinederived phenolic compound p-cresol and its conjugates (p-cresol sulfate and p-cresyl glucuronide), as well as phenylalanine-derived phenylacetylglutamine. These metabolites, produced by gut microbial fermentation of ArAAs, were increased in both RBD-PD and iRBD patients, suggesting that these metabolic alterations may be innate to this subtype rather than merely a consequence of PD disease progression. Previous studies have shown that the members of the order Clostridiales , particularly Clostridiaceae and Ruminococcaceae , are primary fermenters of ArAAs and producers of p-cresol. 50,51 We found that the abundances of Clostridiales bacterium GWC2\_40\_7 and Ruminiclostridium cellulolyticum (both belonging to the order Clostridiales) , as well as Flintibacter muris , were signi fi cantly increased in both RBD-PD patients and iRBD patients. This enrichment may contribute to the increase in p-cresol and its hepatic conjugated forms. P-cresol and its metabolites, particularly p-cresol sulfate, are highly cytotoxic, inducing oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, neuroin fl ammation, and synaptic disruption. 52 Recent studies have demonstrated that p-cresol disrupts the integrity of the blood -brain barrier (BBB) by activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling and promoting matrix metalloproteinase release, thereby inducing extracellular matrix degradation, cytoskeletal changes, and weakened cell junctions, ultimately leading to increased BBB permeability. 52,53 Critically, the elevations in p-cresol and its metabolites were strongly linked to increased levels of the immune-in fl ammatory proteins TGFA, NCF2, WNT9A, and CCL11 (Fig. 5e).

Our metagenomic functional analysis revealed microbial shifts that drive the accumulation of these toxic metabolites. The gut microbiota of both RBD-PD patients and iRBD patients demonstrated a functional transition away from the effective utilization and fermentation of dietary fi ber and toward the degradation of proteins and amino acids. K21556 and K01181 are key genes encoding enzymes that regulate the polysaccharide utilization system for producing short-chain FFAs. 54 The depletion of these genes suggests an impairment in dietary fi ber fermentation in both RBD-PD patients and iRBD patients. Consistent with our fi ndings, previous studies reported a signi fi cant enrichment of genera such as Akkermansia, Collinsella , and Desulfovibrio , as well as a signi fi cant depletion of butyrate-producing bacteria (e.g., Butyricicoccus , Faecalibacterium , and Lachnospira ) in both iRBD patients and their fi rst-degree relatives. 1 These alterations are highly consistent with those observed in early PD patients. 1,55

Conversely, genes involved in protein transport (K02031, ddpD , and K02032, ddpF , peptide/nickel transport system ATP-binding proteins) and phenylalanine catabolism (K01269, yhfE , aminopeptidase; K01426, amiE , amidase) 56 were signi fi cantly upregulated, providing evidence for enhanced proteolysis and the generation of toxic products. Additionally, we found a signi fi cant enrichment of functional genes (K01207, nagZ , beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase; K01628, fucA , L-fuculose-phosphate aldolase) involved in amino sugar and fucose metabolism in both RBD-PD patients and iRBD patients. These sugars are major components of the intestinal mucus layer (mucin). 57,58 The enrichment of these genes suggests accelerated mucin degradation, further compromising epithelial barrier integrity in RBD-PD and iRBD patients.

In summary, our multiomics analyses revealed convergent metabolic shifts in both the RBD-PD and non-RBD-PD subtypes, characterized by inhibited TCA cycle fl ux, urea cycle impairment, and substantial lipid remodeling. These metabolic aberrations collectively may exacerbate mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, neuroin fl ammation, and altered immune responses. We also demonstrated a more severe accumulation of gut-derived toxic proteolytic metabolites in RBD-PD patients, with these alterations already present in the prodromal stage, iRBD. The integration of metagenomics provides evidence that gut dysbiosis induces a functional shift away from dietary fi ber fermentation toward protein and mucin degradation, which might contribute to these metabolic abnormalities. This interplay between the microbiome and host metabolism jointly promotes dopaminergic neurodegeneration and accelerates pathological progression. These fi ndings expand our understanding of the heterogeneity of PD and reveal potential biological pathways for therapeutic intervention.

Nonetheless, several limitations remain. First, although we adjusted for key confounders such as hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, and antiparkinsonian medication, other covariates that may impact the molecular pro fi les (e.g., smoking status, dietary habits, and environmental factors) were not comprehensively controlled. Second, the diagnosis of RBD-PD in Cohort 1 was questionnaire-based, which may not fully match the vPSGcon fi rmed diagnoses. To address this, we validated the key RBDPD-associated metabolites in an independent vPSG-con fi rmed cohort (Cohort 2), despite the relatively limited sample size. Given that ethnic, genetic, environmental, and healthcare system differences may impact multiomics fi ndings, future validation in large-scale, multicenter cohorts is warranted. Third, our proteomic analysis was restricted to in fl ammationand immune-related proteins. Consequently, investigations into potential changes in other protein classes, such as those involved in neuronal and synaptic function, mitochondrial function, or structural proteins, are limited. Finally, this cross-sectional design limits causal inference, and longitudinal investigations are needed to determine the temporal evolution of these molecular signatures and assess their predictive value for disease progression or phenotypic conversion.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Subject recruitment

This study was based on two independent cohorts comprising the discovery phase (Cohort 1) and the validation phase (Cohort 2). Participants in Cohort 1 were recruited from July 2016 to May 2024 at the First Af fi liated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, with ethical approval from the hospital Ethics Committee (reference No. LCKY2014-29). Participants in Cohort 2 were recruited from March 2023 to July 2025 at the Af fi liated Brain Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University (ethics approval reference No. 2022.023; cohort register reference No. ChiCTR2400092208). This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants provided written informed consent.

The inclusion criteria for PD patients in both cohorts included the following: (1) diagnosis con fi rmed by two independent neurologists according to the Movement Disorder Society Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for PD; 59 (2) exclusion of Parkinsonian syndromes or other similar disorders; (3) exclusion of comorbidities, including severe diabetes and hypertension; and (4) exclusion of patients receiving antibiotic treatment within one month prior to enrollment.

To de fi ne RBD, we used the Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder Screening Questionnaire-Hong Kong (RBDQ-HK) in Cohort 1. This is a validated tool to diagnose clinically probable RBD with a cutoff score above 18 (82.2% sensitivity, 86.9% speci fi city). 60 -62 In Cohort 2, RBD diagnosis was con fi rmed according to the International Classi fi cation of Sleep Disorders (3rd edition) on the basis of a history of dream-enactment behavior and increased electromyographic activity in submental and limb muscles determined by vPSG during REM sleep. 63 The participants were subjected to comprehensive neurological assessments via standardized protocols. The two cohorts included several measurements, including the Hoehn -Yahr staging for evaluating motor function severity, 64 the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) for assessing daytime sleepiness, and the RBDQ-HK for quantifying RBD severity. Speci fi cally, in Cohort 1, the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) was used to measure overall sleep quality. 65

## Plasma sample collection

Following overnight fasting, peripheral venous blood was collected into an EDTA-anticoagulated tube. The samples were processed using a two-step centrifugation protocol: fi rst, they were centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 min to separate the cellular components, followed by centrifugation of the supernatant at 2000 × g for 5 min to obtain platelet-poor plasma. The plasma was aliquoted and stored at -80 °C until analysis.

## Metabolomics and lipidomics analysis

For metabolomic pro fi ling, the metabolite extraction protocol was described in our previous work. 18 For GC -MS analysis, the metabolite extracts underwent a two-step derivatization process involving oximation followed by silylation prior to analysis. 66 For lipidomics analysis, a biphasic extraction system utilizing methyl tert-butyl ether/methanol/water was implemented to extract lipid species.

Three analytical platforms were combined to maximize metabolome coverage: LC -MS in positive ionization mode (ESI+) targets basic and positively charged metabolites, LC -MS in negative ionization mode (ESI-) speci fi cally detects acidic and negatively charged metabolites, and GC -MS pro fi les low-polarity or volatile metabolites that are incompatible with the reversedphase LC, thereby ensuring comprehensive detection of chemically diverse metabolite classes. The detailed chromatographic gradients and mass spectrometric acquisition parameters for each analytical platform are described in our previous studies. 18,66

## Metabolite identi fi cation

For LC -MS analysis, data were acquired in information-dependent acquisition mode to comprehensively collect exact mass ( m/z) , retention time (tR), and secondary MS/MS spectra at low (15 eV), medium (30 eV), and high (45 eV) collision energies. Metabolite identi fi cation was achieved by matching m/z (±10 ppm), tR (±0.15 min), and MS/MS spectral data against both the MS-DIAL database and an in-house reference library (OSI/SMMS) established using authentic chemical standards. 67,68 For GC -MS analysis, metabolite identi fi cation followed our prior strategy, involving preliminary structural assignment via database searches (NIST 11, Mainlib, replib, Fiehn, etc.) and de fi nitive con fi rmation through retention index matching and spectral veri fi cation using authentic standards. 66 Detailed structural annotations for all the detected metabolites are provided in Supplementary Tables 1 -3.

## Raw data processing and normalization

To ensure accurate quanti fi cation, the chromatographic peaks for all identi fi ed metabolites in LC -MS-based metabolomics were manually integrated via SCIEX OS (Ver.2.1.6.59781) software. In total, 241 metabolites were identi fi ed in the ESI+ mode, and 189 metabolites were identi fi ed in the ESImode. 18 For the GC -MS data, 190 ion features were annotated with de fi nite metabolite information. 66 A quantitative method based on speci fi c retention times and characteristic ions for these identi fi ed metabolites was established via postrun analysis software (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Peak area integration across all samples was then performed via GC -MS browser software (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). 66 Following dereplication, a total of 455 unique metabolites were retained from the LC -MS and GC -MS analyses. All lipidomics raw data fi les were processed through the MS-DIAL software pipeline, which encompasses chromatographic peak alignment, feature extraction, and integration to acquire peak areas for each lipid species. 66 The analysis yielded 802 lipids identi fi ed in ESI+ mode and 348 lipids identi fi ed in ESI- mode. After removing duplicate lipid species, 771 unique lipid species were ultimately characterized and used for statistical analysis.

Missing values in the datasets, which largely result from biological or technical reasons (e.g., concentrations below the limit of detection or biological absence), were handled in two steps. First, features with missing value frequencies greater than 20% in all three sample groups were removed. All remaining missing values in the fi ltered datasets were subsequently imputed with zero prior to analysis. 69 To enhance comparability across analytical batches and platforms, raw peak areas were calibrated using a panel of stable isotope-labeled ISs that had been spiked into the extraction solvents (detailed in the Supplementary Materials). For the GC -MS data, an additional signal drift correction via the local mean signal correction algorithm (LoMec, which is based on the mean value of two adjacent QC samples) was applied to the raw data prior to IS calibration.

## Proteomic pro fi ling and data processing

Proteomic analysis was performed via the proximity extension assay technique (Olink Bioscience AB). We selected the Olink Explore 384 In fl ammation Panel, which comprises 363 oligonucleotide-labeled antibody probe pairs designed to specifi cally bind in fl ammation-associated target proteins in samples, enabling subsequent detection and quanti fi cation via polymerase chain reaction ampli fi cation coupled with next-generation sequencing (NGS). NGS was performed on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform. The incubation, extension, and detection steps of the Olink experiment were performed by Sinotech Genomics Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).

The raw NGS data were processed via Olink bcl2count ™ software to generate counts .csv fi les. The resulting count fi les were imported into Olink NPX Manager to generate normalized protein expression (NPX) data, which were used for downstream bioinformatic analysis pipelines. The calculation of the NPX values involves two steps. First, the assay counts for each sample are normalized to the known standard (extension control), followed by a log2 transformation. The second step is intensity normalization, which is achieved by subtracting the median value of all samples (excluding the control strip) from each sample ' s log2-transformed value. The NPX generation process is mathematically de fi ned by the following equations, where i indicates a speci fi c assay, j indicates a sample, and ExtNPX represents the extension-normalized NPX value.

ExtNPXi ; j ¼ log 2 ð counts sample j Assay i    = counts extension controlj   

NPXi ; j ¼ ExtNPXi ; j   median ExtNPX Samples i ð Þ ð Þ

Details about the 363 proteins, analytical range, data normalization and standardization are available online (www.olink.com).

Identi fi cation of differentially abundant metabolites and proteins To comprehensively characterize global alterations in metabolic and proteomic pro fi les across comparative cohorts, OPLS-DA was conducted via SIMCA software. Model validity was statistically veri fi ed through analysis of cross-validated residuals via CVANOVA (cross-validation analysis of variance), with a signi fi cance threshold de fi ned at p &lt; 0.05, con fi rming the discriminatory power between groups.

To identify differentially expressed features, metabolites and lipids were compared via the Mann -Whitney U test, whereas Student ' s t test was used for proteomics analysis. Additionally, the Benjamini -Hochberg procedure was applied to control the false discovery rate for multiple comparisons. A q -value less than 0.05 was considered statistically signi fi cant. Furthermore, logistic regression analysis was performed to control for potential confounding factors, including the presence of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, anxiety and depression, and the use of anti-Parkinsonian drugs. The cutoff was set at an adjusted p -value &lt; 0.1.

## Functional annotation of differential proteins

The list of DEPs was converted into the standard Entrez Gene Identi fi ers via the Gene ID Conversion Tool. GO, KEGG pathway, and Reactome pathway analyses were performed via DAVID. The GO enrichment bar plots, enrichment circle diagrams, and chord diagrams were generated via the analytical tools provided by the MetWare Cloud.

## Random forest analysis for feature selection

RF analysis was performed in the R statistical environment (accessed via RStudio version 2025.09.2) using the random forest package. To identify the most robust and stable predictors discriminating between groups, an iterative RF selection approach was implemented. The entire iterative process was made reproducible by setting a global random seed (set.seed(42)) prior to initiating the loop. A standard RF classi fi cation model was constructed over 999 independent iterations. For each iteration, the model was built using 500 decision trees (ntree = 500). For each feature, the mean and standard deviation of both its MDA and MDG scores were calculated after the 999 runs. The top 30 most important features, as ranked by the MDA and MDG scores, were visualized via bar charts created with the ggplot2 package.

## Biomarker panel construction

The top 30 ranked molecules were subsequently subjected to binary logistic regression analysis in PASW Statistics (v18.0.0, IBM Corp.) via the forward stepwise method, yielding an optimized combinatorial biomarker panel. To obtain a robust and unbiased estimate of the model ' s predictive performance, we employed an iterative leave-group-out cross-validation strategy. The complete dataset was randomly partitioned 1000 times into a training set (70% of the samples) and a hold-out test set (30% of the samples). In each of the 1000 iterations, a logistic regression model was built using the training data and subsequently used to predict the outcomes of the remaining test data. For each of the 1000 iterations, the AUC, sensitivity, and speci fi city were calculated on the hold-out test set. The mean and standard deviation of the AUC, sensitivity, and speci fi city across all 1000 cross-validation runs were calculated. Following this validation, a fi nal logistic regression model was trained on the entire dataset (100% of the samples) to establish the de fi nitive coef fi cients for the combined biomarker signature.

## Metagenomic sequencing

A total of 73 stool samples were obtained from participants (21 RBD-PD patients, 8 non-RBD-PD patients, 21 iRBD patients, and 23 healthy controls) enrolled in Cohort 2 following standardized clinical protocols. In brief, all participants were instructed to collect a fresh mid-portion stool sample using the provided sterile

containers. The samples were then transported to the laboratory within 2 h on ice. Stool samples were aliquoted and stored at -80 °C until they were transported to Novogene (Beijing, China) for shotgun metagenomic sequencing. After initial sample inspection, DNA quality control was performed following Novogene ' s standard QC work fl ow. Detailed information on wholegenome shotgun sequencing and data preprocessing is provided in the Supplementary Materials.

Differential abundance analysis of gut microbial species and functional genes

The statistical signi fi cance of differential taxonomic and functional abundance in two-group comparisons was assessed in R. Data manipulation was performed via the ' dplyr ' package. The normality of the distribution within each group was examined with the Shapiro -Wilk test. When both groups satis fi ed the normality assumption (Shapiro -Wilk p &gt; 0.05), group means were compared via Welch ' s two-sample t test; otherwise, the nonparametric Mann -Whitney U test was employed (including cases with insuf fi cient sample sizes for the Shapiro -Wilk test). The resulting p -values were corrected for multiple comparisons via the Benjamini -Hochberg procedure. The top 16 gut bacterial taxa whose relative abundances changed signi fi cantly in both RBD-PD and iRBD patients were identi fi ed by simultaneously satisfying p &lt; 0.001 and |FC | &gt; 1.5 in both the RBD-PD vs. Ctrl and iRBD vs. Ctrl comparisons. The top 38 most signi fi cantly dysregulated functional genes were identi fi ed by simultaneously meeting the criteria of p &lt; 0.005 and |FC | &gt; 1.5 in both the RBD-PD vs. Ctrl and iRBD vs. Ctrl comparisons.

## DATA AVAILABILITY

The proteomic data analyzed in this study are available at fi gshare (https://doi.org/ 10.6084/m9. fi gshare.31007854). Proteomics data and protein mapping to UniProt identi fi ers and gene names were provided by Sinotech Genomics Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) and Olink. All datasets generated and/or analyzed during this study are provided in Supplementary Data 1. All R scripts used for logistic regression, random forest, and iterative leave-group-out cross-validation are available in Supplementary Data 2.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

W.L. was supported by Shanghai Municipal Central Government funds for guiding local scienti fi c and technological development (YDZX20213100001002) and the National Natural Sciences Foundation of China (NSFC 82271524). Y.S. was supported by the Dalian Science and Technology Talent Innovation Support Program (2024RY003) and Young Top Talents in the Xingliao Talents Program of Liaoning Province (XLYC2403127). J.W. was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82401742) and the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2024A1515011349). H.C. was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (H.C., ZIAAG000928, 000959, 000945). Y.L. was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province (No. 2023-MS-262). Dr. Cong Liu is a SANS exploration scholar. The contributions of the NIH author(s) were made as part of their of fi cial duties as NIH federal employees, are in compliance with agency policy requirements, and are considered works of the United States Government. However, the fi ndings and conclusions presented in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re fl ect the views of the NIH or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Additionally, we particularly thank Professor Ara Koh, from Pohang University of Science and Technology for signi fi cant assistance with this study.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Experimental design was performed by W.L., G.X., and Y.S. Plasma sample and clinical information collection were conducted by J.W., Y.N., Q.J., T.L., S.Z., Y.L., Y.G., X.G., and M.L. Plasma sample pretreatment was carried out by Y.S., Z.L., and Y.G. Metabolomic analysis was performed by Y.S., Y.L., Q.L., and X.W. Metagenomic analysis was conducted by J.W., Y.L., and J.Z. Data statistics were performed by Y.S. Writing of the original draft was carried out by Y.S. Review and editing were carried out by Y.S., J.W., Y.L., C.L., H.C., Y.N., and W.L. Supervision was conducted by W.L., Y.S., and G.X. Project administration was carried out by W.L. and D.W. All authors have read and approved the article.

## ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-026-02613-8.

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Publisher ' s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af fi liations.

## Table 1

| 0                                  | 1          | 2          | 3           | 4       | 5          | 6           | 7           | 8           | 9       |
|:-----------------------------------|:-----------|:-----------|:------------|:--------|:-----------|:------------|:------------|:------------|:--------|
| Age, years, mean (SD)              | 66.4 (7.0) | 65.9 (8.1) | 68.2 (7.0)  | 0.0632  | 63.1 (7.0) | 62.8 (11.2) | 64.8 (8.3)  | 64.8 (6.0)  | 0.7137  |
| Female/Male                        | 54/48      | 58/55      | 54/51       | 0.9664  | 9/21       | 4/10        | 8/22        | 8/22        | 0.9901  |
| Disease duration, years, mean (SD) | -          | 5.4 (5.0)  | 7.5 (5.0)   | 0.0002  | -          | 4.6 (2.9)   | 3.4 (3.4)   | -           | 0.1402  |
| H-Y staging, mean (SD)             | -          | 2.2 (0.8)  | 2.7 (0.7)   | 0.0002  | -          | 1.9 (1.4)   | 1.8 (1.1)   | -           | 0.9647  |
| RBDQ-HK, mean (SD)                 | -          | 7.4 (5.0)  | 34.5 (10.9) | <0.0001 | 4.5 (5.1)  | 13.9 (18.1) | 33.9 (23.1) | 47.1 (13.7) | <0.0001 |
| PSQI, mean (SD)                    | -          | 9.1 (4.4)  | 11.4 (4.5)  | 0.0005  | -          | -           | -           | -           | -       |
| ESS, mean (SD)                     | -          | 7.7 (4.8)  | 10.4 (5.8)  | 0.0009  | 15.6 (5.2) | 18.1 (4.6)  | 17.2 (4.9)  | 13.5 (3.6)  | 0.0045  |
| History of diabetes, Y/N           | 22/80      | 15/98      | 14/91       | 0.1700  | -          | -           | -           | -           | -       |
| Hyperlipidemia, Y/N                | 17/85      | 19/94      | 16/89       | 0.9425  | 11/19      | 2/12        | 10/20       | 5/25        | 0.1859  |
| Anxiety or depression, Y/N         | -          | 21/92      | 21/84       | 0.7911  | 3/27       | 5/9         | 9/21        | 2/28        | 0.0213  |
| Anti-PD drugs, Y/N                 | -          | 87/26      | 91/14       | 0.0652  | -          | 12/2        | 25/5        | -           | 0.8406  |