## Introduction

Parkinson's  disease  (PD)  is  a  progressive  neurodegenerative disease caused by degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc), which results in a heterogenous clinical picture.  Although  it  is  diagnosed  clinically  with  the  presence  of characteristic motor symptoms (bradykinesia tremor, and rigidity) (1), eye movement impairment is often neglected. Nakamura et al. (2) found a prevalence of eye movement impairment of around 75%, while in the general population it is significantly lower and ranges from 31% in the age group 50 to 59 years to 51% in subjects older than 80 years (3).

Different  types  of  eye  movements  are  regulated  with  various neuroanatomical loops. Several studies using eye-trackers have shown that PD patients have fragmented and hypometric smooth pursuit movements with prolonged latency. Also, the horizontal and vertical saccades are slower and hypometric, with impaired precision (4-8). Research by Zhang et al. (9) has also detected changes in fixation stability  and  visual  range  during  smooth  pursuit  eye  movements. Furthermore, antisaccades in PD patients also have longer latency and a higher number of errors, possibly also contributing to dysexecutive syndrome in these patients (10). Neurodegeneration in PD affects also memory-guided saccades, which have prolonged latency, especially when integration of memory and visual information is needed (11). Patients with PD have trouble with initiation and execution of these saccades (12), which correlates with their cognitive state (13). The integration of different types of eye-movements in complex tasks, such as during reading, is also impaired in PD. For example, during reading, patients with PD present with hypometric saccades and fragmented smooth pursuit, which results in an increased number of corrective saccades (14). Similar to memory-guided saccades, cognitive function is invaluable in the integration of eye movements during reading (15).

What is still debatable is when the impairemet of different types of eye movements occur and whether they are present in the early stage of PD. The Hoehn and Yahr (H&amp;Y) scale is a widely utilized tool for staging  the  progression  of  PD,  categorizing  patients  based  on  the severity of their motor symptoms. In the early stages of PD (H&amp;Y stages 0, 1 and 2), patients exhibit unilateral or bilateral motor symptoms without  significant  postural  instability  (16).  Zhou  et  al.  (17)  have determined that there are already changes in saccadic latency and accuracy in de  novo PD  patients.  According  to  already  mentioned research by Terao et al. (6), reflexive saccades remain preserved until several years after disease onset. However, a newer study by Yu et al. (13) has shown that there is early impairment of reflexive saccades in PD.

We aimed to explore changes of smooth pursuit, reflexive, and memory-guided  saccades  and  antisaccades  in  early-stage  PD  as compared  to  age  and  sex  matched  healthy  controls.  We  used eye-tracker to objectively evaluate eye-movements. We hypothesised that patients in early-stage of disease would already have significantly impaired eye-movements.

## 2 Methods

## 2.1 Participants

This cross-sectional study was undertaken at the Department of Neurology, University Hospital Center Osijek. Detailed study design can be seen as Supplementary

## 2.2 Methods

Examinees filled out a standardized questionnaire on the age of disease onset, disease duration, dominant hand, disease lateralization, education, comorbidities, and PD treatment. Motor symptoms and disease stage were assessed using Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale Part III and IV (MDS-UPDRS III and IV), while MoCA was used to assess cognition (22).

## 2.3 Eye movement recording and analysis

Eye movements were recorded and analysed by Tobii Eye Tracker 4C, which captures eye movements based on screen coordinates at a frequency of 90 Hz. Each stimulus was displayed as white dots against a black background (23). Prior to assessment onset, each patient was apprised  of  the  anticipated  procedures  during  the  testing  and thereafter underwent eye movement calibration. The test lasted for 10 to 15 min. All assessments were conducted ON medication.

The test battery consisted of tests for smooth pursuit, reflexive and memory  saccades,  as  well  as  anti-saccades.  Integration  of  eye movements  was  tested  during  reading.  Data  was  recorded  using software program Neus v2.0.

Smooth pursuit eye movements were evaluated by tracking a dot along  the  horizontal  and  vertical  axes  at  three  distinct  velocities, defined by the duration of a single movement cycle. The quickest cycle lasted for 1,600 milliseconds (ms), the moderate cycle 2,400 ms, and the slowest cycle 4,800 ms (Supplementary Figure 2A). Each cycle and axis  was  defined  by  the  accuracy,  velocity,  phase  (distance  to  the stimulus during pursuit), and range of ocular movements, as well as the number of fixations. Accuracy, velocity, and phase were quantified using mean square error (MSE), with values ranging from 0 to 1, where values approaching 1 indicate a greater divergence from the stimulus.

Reflexive saccades were evaluated by instructing the participant to focus on the dot upon its appearance on the screen in both horizontal and vertical orientations (Supplementary Figure 2B). The latency of the initial accurate gaze and the actual latency (when a minimum of five accurate gazes were recorded) were assessed. For the antisaccades, we instructed participants to gaze in the opposite direction of the appearing dot, in a horizontal axis (Supplementary Figure 2C). We documented the number of corrections and accurate movements, the proportion of erroneous  eye  movements,  actual  latency,  and  the  eye  movement deviation.

Visually guided memory saccades were evaluated utilizing the Corsi test. The Corsi blocks were emphasized in a random sequence

using distinct colors, and the test subject was required to recall and replicate this sequence. In a subsequent assessment, the participant was required to memorize the highlighted Corsi blocks and then indicate them in reverse sequence (Supplementary Figure 2D). The quantity of indicated blocks commenced at two and augmented with each accurate response. If an incorrect response was provided, the remainder of the Corsi  test  was  terminated.  Four  Corsi  trials  (two  in  the  forward direction and two in the backward direction) were conducted during the eye movement assessments. The analysis encompassed the quantity of accurate forward and backward hits, the number of correct hits in one trial, the peak level reached in one trial, the number of correct hits attained in a test, and the greatest overall level reached.

Additionally, we conducted a reading test, by asking the examinees to  read  a  semantically  meaningful  text  in  their  native  (Croatian) language  that  required  their  attention  and  concentration.  During reading,  we  recorded  the  percentage  of  text  read  (as  a  marker  of average reading speed), percentage of text read before they return back to previous text, saccade velocity, ratio of number of saccades during reading forwards and backwards, the minimal and maximal number of eye fixations in 1 s, the duration of eye fixation, and the difference in the duration of different eye fixations.

## 2.4 Statistical analysis

The  statistical  analysis  was  conducted  using  SPSS  23.0  (IBM, Chicago, IL). We employed the Shapiro-Wilk test to assess the normality of the distribution of numerical data. Nominal variables were analysed using the Pearson chi-square test. We used the Student t -test to compare parametric and Mann-Whitney U test to compare non-parametric data. The statistical significance threshold was established at alpha = 0.05.

## 3 Results

## 3.1 Characteristics of examinees

Forty-two subjects with early-stage idiopathic PD and 50 healthy controls participated in the study. As can be seen in Table 1, there were no statistically significant differences in age, gender, years of education, or cognitive status between groups.

Regarding  patients  with  early-stage  PD,  their  age  at  disease diagnosis was 60 (53.75-65.25) years, and the average duration of disease was 4 (2-7) years, with an average levodopa-equivalent daily dose (LEDD; calculated using standard conversion formula) of 500 (400-772) milligrams. There were 10 (23.8%) patients in H&amp;Y stage 0, 13 (31%) in stage 1, and 19 (45.2%) in stage 2, respectively. When observing their motor symptoms, the average MDS-UPDRS III score was 11 (9-15.25), while MDS-UPDRS IV score was 0 (0-0).

## 3.2 Differences in eye movements

We also compared the differences in the parameters of smooth pursuit movements between these groups of subjects. In all observed cycles, patients with early-stage PD had significantly slower velocity, a larger phase, and a smaller range of movement, both in the horizontal and vertical axes. Their accuracy was also impaired, but only in the fastest cycle in the vertical axis. These results can be seen in Figures 1A-E.

TABLE 1  Comparison of demographic parameters between patients with early-stage PD and healthy controls.

| Variable                      |             | Examinees             | Examinees         | p      |
| Sex                           | Male Female | 32 (76.2%) 10 (23.8%) | 30 (60%) 20 (40%) | 0.09 † |
| Age (years)                   |             | 66.5 (59.75-71)       | 63 (56.5-68)      | 0.07 * |
| Duration of education (years) |             | 12 (12-15.75)         | 12 (12-16)        | 0.23 * |
| MoCA                          |             | 27 (25-28.25)         | 27 (26.5-28)      | 0.34 * |

† Pearson's chi-squared test.

* Student's t-test.

PD, Parkinson's disease; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment.

We  did  not  find  any  statistically  significant  differences  in parameters of reflexive saccades between patients with early PD and healthy controls. On the other hand, patients with PD had significantly worse  results  regarding  visually  guided  memory  saccades.  More precisely, they had a lower number of correct hits in both directions, a lower number of correct hits in one trial and overall, and a lower level reached when performing the Corsi test (Figure 2).

When observing antisaccades, patients with early-stage PD had fewer correct hits than healthy controls (6 versus 13, p &lt; 0,001, MannWhitney U test),  but  there  were  no  differences  in  other  observed parameters between these two groups.

During  the  reading  test,  patients  with  early-stage  PD  showed significantly slower reading speed (evidenced by the percentage of read text before stopping). They also had a larger deviation of duration of eye fixations, a larger minimal ratio of number of saccades forwards and backwards, and a longer average duration of eye fixation (Figures 3A,B).

## 4 Discussion

Our study focuses on early-stage PD patients, which is evidenced by H&amp;Y stage.  Our  results  showed  significant  impairment  of  smooth pursuit eye-movements and visually guided memory saccades in patients with early-stage PD. Therefore, it is not surprising that patients with early-stage PD also have problems while reading, with longer duration of eye fixation and slower reading speed. We have not found convincing evidence of impairment of reflexive saccades and antisaccades, which could be explained by their separate neuroanatomical regulation.

Many previous studies (4-6) have shown that PD patients have disorders in various aspects of eye movements. However, there is a paucity of studies that examine the impairment of eye movements in early-stage  PD.  Also,  most  studies  focus  on  smooth  pursuits  and voluntary and reflexive saccades and neglect memory saccades and parameters of reading.

## 4.1 Smooth pursuit movements in early-stage PD

During the clinical examination of patients with PD, the examiner can  often  notice  fragmented  smooth  movements  of  the  eyeball. However,  there  is  a  whole  spectrum  of  other  smooth  movement disorders that can only be detected using an eye-tracker. It is thought

Eye movement accuracy (MSE) (x10-3)

* Mann-Whitney Utest

PD, Parkinson's disease; MSE, mean squared error; ms miliseconds

Error bars represent the standard error of the mean

(SEM)/interquartile range (IQR)

Dots represent individual subject values

Eye movement velocity (MSE) (x10-6)

* Mann-Whitney Utest t PD, Parkinson's disease; MSE, mean squared error; ms,

miliseconds

that  67%  of  patients  with  PD  have  some  impairment  of  smooth tracking movements, which is the highest prevalence of all possible types of ocular movements (4). It is evident that patients with PD have significantly worse smooth pursuit velocities compared to healthy controls and that these changes are especially present during execution of faster moves. Additionally, patients with PD have more frequent saccadic  intrusions,  which  can  manifest  as  fixations  and  thus  be quantified (24). It is not entirely clear at which stage of the disease these changes occur, although in the study by Bares et al. (25) damage to movement velocity was already present after 2.2 years of disease duration. In addition, earlier studies also looked at phase of movement but did not provide consistent data on whether this parameter is also impaired (24). In our study, we confirmed that subjects with earlystage PD have a slower velocity of smooth pursuit movement. Also, our subjects with PD also had a longer phase and a smaller range of motion of smooth pursuit movement, which are expected characteristics  in  patients  suffering  from  PD.  The  mentioned parameters indicated already significantly impaired smooth movements because they are present in all observed cycles and in both the horizontal and vertical axes. In the fastest movement cycle in PD patients,  movement  accuracy  was  also  impaired,  but  only  in  the vertical  axis.  However,  we  did  not  find  significant  changes  in  the

P=

P=0.

&lt;0,00

* Mann-Whitney U test

Error bars represent the standard error of the mean tPD, Parkinson's disease; MSE, mean squared error; ms, miliseconds

+ Student's t-test t PD, Parkinson's disease; ms, miliseconds

number  of  fixations.  These  results  could  indicate  that  saccadic intrusions occur in later stages of PD, after the velocity, phase, and range of movements have already been damaged.

In regulation of smooth eye movements, signals from different parts of the cortex affect the frontal and parietal eye fields (FEF and

PEF, respectively), which are the initiators of movement and act on the superior colliculus to execute the movement. The outer and inner parts of the globus pallidus serve to fine-tune these movements (26). Even  though  other  centres  provide  the  signal  for  smooth  eye movements, the globus pallidus plays a crucial role in fine-tuning

P=0,002

Range (

* Mann-Whitney Utest t PD. Parkinson's disease: ms, miliseconds

Error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM)/interquartile range (IQ)

Dots represent individual subiect values

P&lt;0,001

these movements and determining their execution accuracy, directly impacting the FEF. In addition, the globus pallidus also participates in a direct and indirect pathway, acting on the modification of motor skills. Due to the destruction of the SNc, the dopaminergic innervation of the striatum is reduced, which is why we have a reduced inhibition of the otherwise inhibitory activity of the globus pallidus, which leads to a reduced modification of movements, along with their slowing down and blocking. The signal is amplified (due to the convergence of projections of the basal ganglia towards the thalamus), which is why changes in smooth tracking movements are already evident with less dopaminergic denervation in the earlier stages of the disease.

## 4.2 Reflexive saccades in early-stage PD

It is known that reflexive saccades in PD patients are hypometric and  of  extended  latency,  with  a  greater  number  of  errors  during execution (27). Some studies have found these changes in de novo PD patients and those with early-stage PD (13, 17), while others say that reflexive saccades become impaired only later (6). We also did not find any changes in reflexive saccades, which suggests that they might be initially preserved until later stages of disease. The rationale for this hypothesis  is  the  distinct  neuroanatomical  regulation  of  reflexive saccades.  PEF  has  direct  projection  to  the  upper  colliculus  and initiates these types of saccades, bypassing the basal ganglia (28). We believe  that  this  mechanism  is  a  possible  explanation  for  the preservation of these components in our subjects with early-stage PD.

## 4.3 Memory saccades in early-stage PD

In contrast to reflexive saccades, patients with early-stage PD in our study had a significantly higher number of errors during the performance of memory saccades than healthy controls, regardless of whether  the  tasks  are  performed  backwards  or  forwards.  These respondents also demonstrate a lower number of correct hits, both in a single trial and overall, as well as a lower overall performance level. We know that memory saccades are a subtype of voluntary saccades, whose generator is also the FEF, which projects directly to the SC. The signal from previous visual stimuli is stored in the cortical-subcortical oculomotor loop (in which numerous memory storage structures participate, i.e., the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex but also the nucleus caudatus and SNr). The FEF is then activated by this signal and makes memory-guided  saccades  with  a  projection  to  the  SC  (29).  We previously mentioned that changes in the FEF and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (13), which affect executive functions and memory, are thought to be responsible for disturbances in memory saccades. Considering that there were no significant differences between our groups of subjects in cognitive function testing, we did not expect that changes would manifest themselves in memory saccades. It is possible

P=0,001

P=0,004

Number of correct hits/level reached

† PD, Parkinson's disease

Error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM)/interquartile range (IOR)

P=0,01

P=0,003

that the initial degeneration of basal ganglia leads to dysfunction in the storage of visual stimuli, implying that these saccades serve as a sensitive  indicator  of  subtle  cognitive  changes,  even  in  the  early stages of PD.

## 4.4 Antisaccades in early-stage PD

The prefrontal cortex is also important in the pathophysiology of antisaccades,  which  cause  the  suppression  of  reflex  saccades  and enable looking in the opposite direction. Therefore, it is not surprising that  cognitive  impairments  also  play  a  major  role  in  lengthening latencies and increasing the number of performance errors (10). Our subjects with PD showed a higher number of errors when performing saccades, but without changes in other parameters. The findings are in favor of the initial changes, with the fact that we cannot ignore the possibility that the changes would be more evident in a larger number of subjects and in patients with longer durations of PD.

## 4.5 Reading in early-stage PD

When  we  look  at  the  bigger  picture  and  the  integration  of different bulbomotor parameters, it is necessary to analyse the reading test. In addition to the standard previously mentioned parameters, with this test we can also evaluate the duration of fixation and the standard range of fixation (range between different fixation durations). It is generally considered that patients with PD are more easily  distracted  due  to  reduced  ability  to  concentrate,  which  is presented by breaking fixation and a larger standard deviation of fixation. This instability of fixation is a marker of neurodegenerative diseases and results in poorer quality of reading. Additionally, due to difficulty in reading, they can have longer average fixation durations and more frequent saccadic movements during reading (30). This results from damage to the neural circuits between the basal ganglia and the dorsal prefrontal cortex, as well as between the basal ganglia and the upper colliculus (7). In our study as well, subjects with earlystage PD showed a longer duration of fixations and a greater range between individual fixations when reading backwards. They also had a lower percentage of the screen read at one time before returning to the already read part of the text, which highlights their impaired reading  speed.  Thus,  we  also  proved  the  existence  of  fixation instability in our subjects, which is characteristic of PD. Unlike other studies, we did not find an increased number of saccades during reading, possibly because of the still early stage of the disease, when saccadic  intrusions  (and  especially  square  wave  jerks)  are  not  so present.

Evident differences in speed of smooth pursuit eye movements between patients with PD and healthy controls raise questions for possible utilization of eye-tracker in non-invasive diagnosis of PD. Of course, in order to implement the mentioned method, additional tests are needed that would confirm our results, with the introduction of a standardized method and a battery of tests that would be used in the examination of eye movements.

P=0,031

P=0,13

· Parameters of readiñg test 8

†Student's t-test t PD, Parkinson's disease; MSE, mean squared error;

Dots represent individual subject' values

Parameters of eye fixations during reading test (ms)

† Student's t-test tPD, Parkinson's disease; MSE, mean squared error;

ms, miliseconds; m/s, meters in second; SD, standard deviation; IQR, interquartile range

## 4.6 Study limitations

Our research was a cross-sectional study. However, the number of patients included in the study and the number of healthy controls is bigger compared to most of the studies done so far. Furthermore, our subjects with PD were not de novo patients and had already received antiparkinsonian therapy. Some studies suggest that antiparkinsonian therapy can influence the eye-movement parameters in PD. However, the LEDD was rather low suggesting that the dopaminergic medication might not have influenced our results considerably.

## 5 Conclusion

Impaired smooth pursuit movements, memory-guided saccades and reading functions are present in early-stage PD, even without other  expressed  motor  symptoms.  The  lack  of  direct  pathway signalling through the globus pallidus and degeneration of oculomotor loop structures, important for storage of visual stimuli, are possible pathophysiological explanations. On the other hand, reflexive saccades and  antisaccades  seem  to  be  preserved  in  these  patients.  These findings could potentially contribute to the development of new and non-invasive diagnostic biomarkers in PD.

## Data availability statement

The datasets presented in this article are not readily available because no restrictions. Requests to access the datasets should be directed to zvonepop@gmail.com.

## Ethics statement

The studies involving humans were approved by Ethical Board of University Hospital Centre in Osijek. The studies were conducted in accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements. The  participants provided  their written informed  consent  to participate in this study.

## Author contributions

ZP:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Resources,  Writing  original  draft,  Writing  -  review  &amp;  editing.  TG:  Data  curation, Methodology, Resources, Writing - original draft, Writing - review &amp; editing. IR: Data curation, Methodology, Resources, Writing - original draft, Writing - review &amp; editing. SM: Formal analysis, Methodology, Resources, Writing - original draft, Writing - review &amp; editing. LK: Data  curation,  Methodology,  Resources,  Writing  -  original  draft, Writing - review &amp; editing. AG: Data curation, Software, Writing original draft, Writing - review &amp; editing. AS: Data curation, Project administration, Software, Writing - original draft, Writing - review &amp; editing. VG: Data curation, Software, Supervision, Writing - original draft,  Writing  -  review  &amp;  editing.  DG:  Data  curation,  Project

## Table 1

| 0                             | 1           | 2                     | 3                 | 4      |
|:------------------------------|:------------|:----------------------|:------------------|:-------|
| Sex                           | Male Female | 32 (76.2%) 10 (23.8%) | 30 (60%) 20 (40%) | 0.09 † |
| Age (years)                   |             | 66.5 (59.75-71)       | 63 (56.5-68)      | 0.07 * |
| Duration of education (years) |             | 12 (12-15.75)         | 12 (12-16)        | 0.23 * |
| MoCA                          |             | 27 (25-28.25)         | 27 (26.5-28)      | 0.34 * |