## Introduction

Parkinson's  disease  (PD)  is  a  complex,  multi-factorial neurodegenerative  disease  with  multi-system  involvement. Pathologically, PD is defined by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and widespread intracytoplasmic  aggregations  of  misfolded  α-synuclein [1]. Rare genetic mutations have been identified in earlyonset,  familial  PD,  but  idiopathic  PD's  complex  etiopathogenesis remains unclear [2].

High-throughput technological developments over the past decade have paved the way for agnostic analysis of multiple omic measures, providing novel insight into disease etiology. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS), for  instance,  have  highlighted  the  role  of  endolysosomal  (vesicle  trafficking,  lysosomes,  and  autophagy)  and immune  pathways  in  PD  [3].  Still,  biologic  processes are  dynamic  and  operate  through  complex  interactions between gene expression, protein function, and metabolism.  Investigating  other  principal  omics,  including  the metabolome, may provide new insights into biologic processes involved in PD.

Recent advances in high-resolution metabolomic profiling  allow  for  the  simultaneous  measurement  of  thousands of metabolites. Metabolic networks shed light on the underlying biochemical activity of cells, tissues, and organs,  enabling  a  multi-system  level  approach  to  the study  of  PD.  Furthermore,  metabolites  reflect  the  convergence  of  genomic,  epigenomic,  transcriptomic,  and proteomic action in tandem with the system's response to environmental exposures, thus offering a readout of both physiologic  and  pathologic  states  of  an  individual  [4]. Metabolites circulating in the blood provide a wealth of information about biologic processes across different systems, including the central nervous system as metabolites can cross the blood-brain barrier [5]. A growing body of work supports the use of metabolomics to provide novel information  about  the  initiation  and  progression  of  PD [5-7]. For instance, metabolites related to lipid metabolism, including glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids, mitochondrial function, and amino acids have been implicated in PD [8, 9].

Here, we have performed a series of untargeted metabolome-wide association studies (MWAS)  to  explore serum  metabolite  signatures  associated  with  PD.  Using metabolite  profiles  measured  by  a  dual-column,  dualpolarity liquid-chromatography approach with high-resolution  mass  spectrometry  (LC-HRMS),  we  performed an  MWAS  with  independent  discovery  and  replication study  populations.  We  identified  individual  metabolite features  associated  with  PD,  evaluated  pathway  enrichment, and investigated associations between PD-MWAS metabolites  and  symptom  profiles  among  patients.  We assessed  both  replication  of  the  metabolite  findings, using the two similar but independent study populations from California, as well as external validation of metabolites previously associated with PD in a metabolomic profiling of drug-naïve patients from a hospital-based study of Chinese PD patients and healthy controls [7]. This previous study analyzed 226 metabolites and associated 50 with  PD.  We  build  on  this  work,  analyzing  nearly  5000 metabolite features using two community-based studies of PD.

Ultimately,  identifying  disrupted  metabolic  pathways in PD may improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying pathogenesis, paving the way for new preventative or therapeutic strategies.

## Methods

## Study population

We used metabolomic profiles from 642 PD patients and 277  controls  recruited  as  part  of  a  community-based study  of  Parkinson's  disease  (Parkinson's  Environment and  Genes  study,  PEG).  PEG  is  a  population-based  PD case-control  study  conducted  in  three  Central  California  counties  [10].  Participants  were  recruited  in  two, independent  study  waves:  PEG1,  2000-2007  and  PEG2, 2011-2018. All those with serum for metabolomics were included  (PEG1: n = 282  PD  patients, n = 185  controls; PEG2: n = 360 PD patients, n = 90 controls). Patients were early in disease course at enrollment (3.0 years [SD = 2.6] on average from diagnosis) and all were seen by UCLA movement disorder specialists  for  in-person  neurologic exams and confirmed as having idiopathic PD based on clinical  characteristics  [11].  Characteristics  of  the  PEG study  subjects  are  shown  in  Supplemental  Table  1.  The patients were on average slightly older than the controls and a higher proportion of the patients were men, Hispanic, and never smokers compared to the controls.

## Sample collection

Blood samples were drawn from participants during field visits.  Samples  were  centrifuged,  kept  on  dry  ice,  and then stored in a -80 °C freezer at UCLA. Serum samples were shipped frozen to Emory University on dry ice for metabolomics analyses, where they were stored at -80 °C until analyses.

## High-Resolution Metabolomics (HRM)

HRM profiling  was  conducted  according  to  established methods.  Detailed  methods  are  provided  in  previous publication  [12].  Briefly,  serum  samples  were  randomly sorted  into  batches  of  40.  Each  sample  was  thoroughly mixed  with ice-cold acetonitrile (2:1 acetonitrile to serum), placed on ice for 30 minutes, precipitated protein was removed by centrifugation, and the resulting supernatant was transferred to an autosampler vial containing

a low volume insert. We analyzed all sample extracts in triplicate  with  a  dual-column,  dual-polarity  approach, including hydrophilic interaction (HILIC) chromatography with positive electrospray ionization (ESI) and C18 chromatography with negative  ESI,  and  used  two  types of  quality  control  samples.  We  included  two  methods of  performance  quality  control.  First,  a  NIST  1950  QC sample  was  analyzed  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the entire analytical run [13]. A second QC sample (Q-Std), which is commercially purchased plasma pooled from an unknown number of men and women, was analyzed at the beginning, middle, and end of each batch of 40 samples for normalization and batch effect evaluation ( n = 180 Q-Std samples total included).

The  Emory  metabolomics  lab  uses  a  quality  control  procedure  based  on  XCMS  and  a  set  of  confirmed metabolites  and  internal  standards  to  evaluate  the  data quality of each batch: number of features detected, missing  values,  mass  accuracy  (threshold  &lt;5  ppm),  Pearson correlation  within  technical  replicates  (threshold:  0.9), and average coefficient of variation (CV) of feature intensities  within  replicates  (threshold:  &lt;30%).  Samples  were re-analyzed if the data did not meet the defined criteria.

Our  samples  were  processed  across  two  LC-HRMS runs  conducted  approximately  6-months  apart,  to  pool the metabolite data across runs, we used the apLCMS R package to  perform  retention  time  adjustment  and  feature  alignment  for  both  HILIC  and  C18  feature  tables, using  the  adjust.time  and  feature.align  functions  [14]. For feature alignment, the m / z tolerance was 1e-05 and retention  time  tolerance  was  37.016  (C18)  and  38.246 (HILIC) seconds. Overall, 2226 features aligned for C18 and 2919 for HILIC across the two LCMS runs. For analyses, we included metabolomic features with median CV among technical replicates &lt;30% and Pearson correlation &gt;0.9 and features detected in &gt;50% of all study samples, leaving  2046  C18  features  and  2716  HILIC  features  for analysis.

We  log  2  transformed  the  metabolite  data,  quantile normalized,  and  batch  corrected  with  ComBat  after replacing  zeroes  with  the  lowest  detected  value  which has  been  recommended  for  metabolomics  data.  Data pre-processing  visualization  is  shown  in  Supplemental Figs. 1, 2, 3 and 4. From principal component (PC) analysis  with  the  HILIC  features,  we  discovered  two  clusters of samples seemingly separating based on technical, nonbiologic factors. As a result, we performed an additional correction  to  remove  variation  between  the  PCs  (Supplemental Figs. 5, 6 and 7). This was done with ComBat, using an indicator for whether the sample was part of the outlying cluster as the correction term.

Within  the  Q-Std  samples  across  both  runs  and all  batches  ( n = 180),  the  mean  CV  across  all  C18

metabolite  features  before  the  data  processing  steps was  157.1%  (median = 75.2%,  IQR = 127.1%)  but  after the processing steps it reduced to 7.2% (median = 6.3%, IQR = 5.5%).  For  HILIC  features,  the  mean  CV  before processing  was  148.0%  (median = 69.3%,  IQR = 128.0%) and  after  the  processing  steps  8.7%  (median = 8.0%, IQR = 8.3%).

## Metabolome-Wide Association Analysis (MWAS)

To identify metabolite features associated with PD, we conducted two sets of  MWAS analyses. First,  we  fit  a linear  regression  model,  using  the limma R  package and  empirical  Bayes  (eBayes)  function  [15],  providing  a  log2  fold  change    (log 2 FC)  estimate  comparing patients  and  controls.  Second,  we  used  unconditional logistic  regression  for  each  metabolite  with  PD  as  the outcome  to  provide  odds  ratio  estimates.  We  determined  metabolite  associations  independently  for  the PEG1  and  PEG2  case-control  studies  and  then  combined odds ratio (OR) estimates in a fixed effects metaanalysis,  using  a  generic  inverse-variance  method  for pooling [16]. For both analyses, we controlled for age, gender, race/ethnicity, a year of sample draw indicator, and study wave as covariates. We used a false discovery rate (FDR) to correct for multiple testing. We prioritized  metabolites  based  on  significance  (FDR&lt;0.05) and    log 2 FC  thresholds  at  ±0.5  (higher-level  of  importance) and ±0.25 (lower-level).

We  assessed  replication  [17],  meaning  confirmation of  associations  across  the  independent,  but  similar PEG1 and PEG2 study populations, which are from the same communities, recruited some 10-years apart, with overlapping study design, data collection and identical laboratory  methods.  Replication  was  based  on  independent  association  of  metabolites  in  both  discovery (PEG1)  and  replication  (PEG2)  populations  at p &lt;0.05 and   log 2 FC at least ±0.25.

For metabolites which showed association with PD,  we  further  tested  for  association  with  the  following  PD  and  PD  symptom  related  phenotypes  among PD  patients  only  using  linear  regression:  levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD), Hoehn Yahr (HY) stage, and  Unified  Parkinson's  disease  Rating  Scale  Part  III (UPDRS-III) score.

We  performed age-related sensitivity analyses for p-cresol  metabolites  as  these  metabolites  showed  positive  correlation  with  age  among  both  patients  and  controls. Within the study population, we matched patients to controls based on age (±2 years), gender, and race, as a 1:1 match and a 2:1 match, then we assessed metabolite associations using the matched data only. In sensitivity analyses, we also processed and analyzed each HRMS

runs  independently  using  the  same  processing  pipeline and limma to calculate   log 2 FC estimates by batch.

## Annotation and pathway analysis

We annotated features  based  on  three  levels.  First,  significant features were matched to a database of authenticated  chemical  standards  previously  characterized  in the  Emory  laboratory,  i.e.,  metabolites  confirmed  using MS/MS and authentic  standards,  providing  the  strongest level of annotation [18, 19]. The error tolerance was set to 5 ppm and 30s for m / z and retention time. Additional m / z feature  mapping  was  done  based  on mummichog annotations  and xMSannotator . mummichog is a  computational  algorithm  which  uses  metabolic  pathways  and  networks  to  predict  functional  activity  from untargeted metabolite feature tables, including providing annotations  of  features  based  upon  predicted  ions  and pathway associations [20]. With xMSannotator , accurate mass m / z for adducts formed under positive/negative ESI mode were matched to HMDB, KEGG, and LipidMaps with a mass error threshold of 10 ppm [21]. xMSannotator uses correlations of intensities and retention time and assigns  confidence  scores  based  on  a  multilevel  scoring algorithm (0-3, a higher score representing higher-confidence result), ensuring annotation accuracy. Only results with scores ≥ 2 were considered for annotations.

For  pathway  enrichment  analysis  we  used metapone , which  uses  a  permutation-based  weighted  hypergeometric  test  with  joint  pathway  analysis  using  positive and  negative  ion  mode  data  to  avoid  double  counting and  account  for  multiple-matching  uncertainty  with  a weighting factor [22]. Metabolic pathways were compiled from KEGG, mummichog ,  and the small molecule pathway database (SMPDB).

## External validation and meta-analysis

For external validation, meaning confirmation of metabolite associations in a different population [17], we compared  our  results  to  a  previous  report  of  untargeted metabolomics in PD [7]. The two studies were different with regard to study location (China and United States), racial composition, recruitment (hospital-based and community-based),  PD  medication  status  (drug-naïve and L-dopa medicated), and other lifestyle and exposure factors  such  as  diet.  Given  such  differences,  in  general, large-scale, agnostic omics studies that achieve reproducibility  based  on  external  validity  indicate  a  robust  association [17].

The previous report detailed an untargeted metabolic profiling  of  PD  from  a  Chinese  population  comparing drug-naïve patients recruited from a hospital to healthy controls  ( n = 223  PD  and n = 237  controls).  They  measured  226  metabolites  with  LCMS,  limiting  analysis  to metabolites  identified  using  internal  standards.  Overall, 50 were associated with PD [17]. In the current study, we detected 34 of the 50 metabolites in our sample, identified  through  either  the  Emory  metabolomics  LCMS in  house  library  or  high  confidence  annotation  in  with xmsAnnotator .  As  only  the  fold  changes, p -values,  and sample  size  were  available  from  the  previous  study,  we used two R packages designed to combine fold changes and p -values  across  studies.  First,  the amanida package, which combines p -values from the individual studies using Fisher's method and fold-changes by averaging, with  both  weighted  by  the  study  size  [23].  Second,  we used metaDEA ,  which  similarly  averages  the  study-specific    log 2 FC, but also calculates the SD, and estimates a 'pseudo t-score' (the ratio of the mean   log 2 FC over the SD of the   log 2 FCs divided by the square root of the number of comparisons) [24]. The absolute value of this score is higher for metabolites with similar   log 2 FCs across the two  studies,  thus  prioritizing  consistency  of  the  estimates.  Validation  was  assessed  at  three  levels:  (1)  significance,  with  the  combined  adj p -value&lt;0.05  and  the individual studies having a p &lt;0.25; (2) direction of effect; and (3) magnitude, with a combined   log 2 FC threshold of ±0.25.

## Results

## Metabolome wide association study

Our  untargeted metabolome-wide  association study included 4762 features for analysis (2046 C18 and 2716 HILIC).  Overall,  based  on  the  linear  model  fit  with limma and eBayes, 296 metabolite features (156 on C18; 140  on  HILIC)  showed  evidence  of  differential  abundance  between  patients  and  controls  (FDR&lt;0.05),  with 134 (79 on C18; 55 on HILIC) having a   log2FC beyond the  ±0.5  threshold  (228  beyond  ±0.25).  Fig.  1  A  and B  show  volcano  plots  of  the  MWAS  results.  The  full MWAS summary statistics are provided in Supplemental Table 2 (C18 metabolites) and Supplemental Table 3 (HILIC  metabolites).  We  also  show  results  from  the logistic  regression  model  of  PD  risk  by  metabolite  feature  in  the  same  supplemental  tables  and  for  analyses processed  and  stratified  by  HRMS  run  (Supplemental Tables 2 and 3 and Supplemental Figs. 8, 9, 10 and 11).

Of  the  associated  metabolite  features,  104  met  our criteria  for  independent  replication  between  our  studies  (discovery  and  replication p &lt;0.05),  with  50  showing a   log2FC beyond ±0.5 (86 beyond ±0.25). From the C18 column,  66  features  were  independently  associated  in discovery and replication at p &lt;0.05 (116 at p &lt;0.10), with 41 having a   log 2FC beyond the ±0.5 (63 beyond ±0.25). From the HILIC column, 38 of the features were associated in discovery and replication at p &lt;0.05 (54 at p &lt;0.10), with 9 having a   log 2 FC beyond ±0.5 (23 beyond ±0.25).

A C18 Column

156 features at FDR &lt;0.05

79 at FDR &lt;0.05 and log threshold (05)

· NS · log2(FC) · p-value · p-value and log2(FC)|

- Logo (Adj P)

B HILIC Column

-Log1o (Adj P)

Inosine

Pyroglutamic acid

Control

Fig. 1 Volcano Plot of the MWAS results from metabolomics LCMS data derived from both the ( A ) C18 negative and ( B ) HILIC positive results. Horizontal lines are shown at FDR≤0.05 and vertical lines are shown at   log 2 FC ±0.5 and dashed lines at   log 2 FC ±0.25. Metabolite features with a -log 10 (FDR)&gt;15 and/or   log 2 FC&gt;2 are designated by the triangle shape and shown at the -log 10 (FDR)=15 and or   log 2 FC =2 lines. Exact results can be found in Supplemental Tables 2 (C18 metabolites) and 3 (HILIC metabolites). C Violin plots show the top three metabolites from the MWAS by FDR that could be annotated at the highest confidence, excluding PD medication-associated metabolites, and separated by the independent study populations.

Annotation based on three-layers (in-house database of metabolites, mummichog annotations,  and xMSannotator high confidence matches) for all features with discovery and replication at p &lt;0.1 is provided in Supplemental Table 4 (C18) and Supplemental Table 5 (HILIC). The full xMSannotator stage 5 annotation results are provided in

Supplemental  Table  6  (C18)  and  Supplemental  Table  7 (HILIC).

Table  1  shows  the  top  MWAS  metabolites  that  were associated with PD in discovery and replication cohorts. As  expected,  the  leading  PD-associated  features  from both  columns  were  related  to  PD-medications,  including  medication  metabolites,  dopamine  3-O-sulfate  and

Dopamine 3-O-sulfate

3-O-Methyldopa

p = 8.5e-07

p = &lt; 2e-16

PD

Table 1 PD MWAS hits: Annotated features from the MWAS associated with Parkinson's disease in both discovery and replication study populations

Compound Annotation*

LEDD FDR

-value

LEDD

Replication (PEG2)

Discovery (PEG1)

Meta FDR

Meta OR (95% CI)

FDR

Fold time

mz

Change (95%

CI)

| ## C18 Negative  232.0282  34.8165  13.85 (8.73, 21.97)  3.27E-24  1.24 (1.18, 1.29)  1.71E-17  1.05E-16  1.15E-05  8.70E-37  8.90E-34  Dopamine 3-O-sulfate  2,3  210.0772  35.9778  3.49 (2.81, 4.34)  3.27E-24  1.72 (1.53, 1.94)  1.09E-16  4.49E-15  2.33E-07  3.17E-76  6.48E-73  3-O-Methyldopa 1,2,3  128.0353  30.6303  1.25 (1.18, 1.32)  5.61E-11  3.79 (2.60, 5.54)  3.51E-09  4.86E-07  1.42E-08  1.84E-01  7.09E-01  Pyroglutamic acid/ Pyrrolidonecarbox-  ylic   acid  1,3  192.0305  24.1011  1.86 (1.58, 2.18)  3.43E-11  1.55 (1.36, 1.76)  1.81E-08  7.84E-10  4.42E-03  2.44E-26  1.67E-23  Dopachrome 2,3  129.0192  33.8177  0.79 (0.73, 0.86)  2.17E-06  0.47 (0.36, 0.61)  7.32E-06  6.14E-04  9.36E-07  5.10E-02  5.24E-01  Itaconate (Itaconic acid)  1,3  435.2514  167.2708  1.44 (1.25, 1.65)  3.94E-05  1.62 (1.36, 1.92)  8.20E-06  1.01E-04  8.85E-05  1.09E-02  3.42E-01  LPA(0:018:1(9Z)); LPA(18:1(9Z)0:0);  DHAP(18:0)  3  199.9693  28.4295  1.56 (1.39, 1.75)  3.43E-11  1.56 (1.32, 1.83)  1.49E-05  7.10E-05  2.95E-10  1.29E-01  6.33E-01  Cysteine-S-sulfate  3  145.0143  28.1639  1.22 (1.11, 1.35)  1.75E-03  1.61 (1.31, 1.98)  7.78E-04  9.43E-04  2.79E-04  5.46E-02  5.32E-01  Oxoglutaric   acid  1,2,3  146.0459  29.4772  1.19 (1.10, 1.28)  5.47E-04  1.86 (1.40, 2.46)  1.26E-03  2.98E-03  4.24E-04  7.60E-02  5.94E-01  Glutamic   acid  2,3  283.0821  30.1765  2.52 (1.67, 3.81)  7.82E-04  1.10 (1.05, 1.15)  3.56E-03  3.63E-04  5.57E-02  8.07E-01  9.66E-01  p-Cresol   glucuronide  3  256.0936  28.4837  1.80 (1.39, 2.35)  7.82E-04  1.14 (1.06, 1.22)  7.97E-03  4.35E-03  2.03E-05  7.59E-02  5.94E-01  Glycerophosphocholine  3  107.0502  34.5396  1.32 (1.16, 1.52)  2.80E-03  1.29 (1.13, 1.47)  1.08E-02  5.43E-03  7.76E-03  2.44E-01  7.52E-01  p-Cresol  3  267.0723  32.8807  0.70 (0.58, 0.84)  4.15E-03  0.82 (0.74, 0.92)  1.36E-02  1.67E-02  3.13E-05  2.85E-02  4.51E-01  Inosine  2,3  148.0405  31.5075  1.46 (1.24, 1.72)  3.80E-04  1.27 (1.12, 1.45)  1.41E-02  1.12E-02  2.23E-03  4.38E-20  1.49E-17  5,6-Dihydroxyindole  2,3  187.0071  35.7939  1.35 (1.17, 1.57)  3.50E-03  1.24 (1.10, 1.39)  1.77E-02  1.03E-02  1.06E-02  3.46E-01  8.40E-01  p-Cresol   sulfate  3  151.0514  33.6125  0.70 (0.58, 0.85)  1.01E-04  0.84 (0.77, 0.93)  2.21E-02  8.23E-03  2.32E-02  5.50E-01  9.03E-01  N1-Methyl-4-pyridone-5-carboxamide  3  172.9914  34.1845  0.79 (0.67, 0.93)  6.08E-02  0.83 (0.74, 0.93)  3.21E-02  4.29E-02  4.95E-03  3.51E-01  8.42E-01  Phenol   sulphate  3  299.2014  200.4142  1.46 (1.19, 1.79)  8.99E-03  1.16 (1.06, 1.26)  3.34E-02  8.45E-02  1.82E-04  1.21E-02  3.51E-01  all-trans-Retinoic   acid  1,3  189.0029  34.3209  1.40 (1.17, 1.69)  8.99E-03  1.17 (1.06, 1.29)  3.98E-02  3.58E-02  1.26E-02  2.64E-01  7.82E-01  Oxalosuccinate  2,3  HILIC Positive  212.0917  60.9225  35.1 (23.0, 53.4)  1.51E-50  1.43 (1.35, 1.52)  4.04E-31  1.08E-28  5.49E-08  3.32E-70  9.03E-67  3-O-Methyldopa 3  185.1285  46.3928  0.75 (0.69, 0.81)  5.21E-10  0.42 (0.32, 0.54)  3.05E-08  1.34E-07  3.79E-05  2.37E-07  1.61E-04  4-Methoxytyramine 3  510.3557  47.829  1.16 (1.11, 1.22)  5.77E-08  4.06 (2.47, 6.65)  1.59E-05  8.16E-04  1.52E-08  1.30E-02  2.78E-01  LysoPC(17:0); LysoPE(0:020:0);  LysoPE(20:00:0)  3  522.3553  48.282  1.17 (1.11, 1.22)  5.77E-08  3.85 (2.37, 6.27)  1.79E-05  3.98E-03  5.78E-09  8.25E-03  2.49E-01  LysoPC(18:1(9Z)); LysoPC(18:1(11Z))  3  494.3237  49.3839  1.15 (1.08, 1.21)  1.86E-04  2.41 (1.64, 3.54)  1.16E-03  1.04E-02  4.02E-06  9.77E-01  9.98E-01  LysoPC(16:1(9Z))  3  149.0597  60.1071  1.17 (1.12, 1.23)  5.77E-08  3.05 (1.85, 5.03)  1.83E-03  4.75E-02  1.77E-09  5.37E-19  4.87E-16  3-Methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylacetalde-  hyde 2  148.0604  89.4789  1.20 (1.10, 1.30)  2.93E-03  1.63 (1.29, 2.08)  5.88E-03  1.10E-02  8.96E-05  1.71E-01  6.41E-01  L-Glutamate  1,3  291.0693  63.1794  0.43 (0.28, 0.66)  6.96E-03  0.91 (0.87, 0.96)  9.37E-03  2.49E-02  6.93E-09  2.01E-01  6.68E-01  Inosine  2  205.0972  59.8331  0.92 (0.88, 0.96)  1.40E-02  0.46 (0.30, 0.71)  2.06E-02  3.15E-03  4.40E-02  7.25E-01  9.39E-01  D-Tryptophan 2,3  244.1542  37.5565  0.82 (0.74, 0.92)  2.23E-02  0.75 (0.64, 0.89)  2.62E-02  7.84E-03  2.02E-02  7.77E-01  9.50E-01  Tiglylcarnitine  3  620.5915  68.302  1.15 (1.07, 1.24)  9.81E-03  1.46 (1.15, 1.86)  5.05E-02  5.77E-02  1.62E-03  2.66E-01  7.40E-01  Cer(d18:122:1(13Z))  3   |

3-O-methyldopa. In total, from the 4762 metabolite features for analysis, 11 C18 features and 16 HILIC features were associated with LEDD at an FDR&lt;0.05 among the PD patients (Supplemental Tables 2 and 3). The majority of  PD-associated  metabolites  were  not  strongly  associated with levodopa medication use.

The  top  three  annotated  metabolites  associated  with PD    (log 2 FC  beyond  ±0.25),  independently  replicated  in our two study populations, and unrelated to LEDD were pyroglutamic acid (log2FC = 0.32,  95%  CI = 0.24, 0.41, FDR = 5.6e-11),  itaconate    (log2FC = -0.33,  95%  CI = -0.45, -0.22, FDR = 2.2e-6), and cysteine-S-sulfate   (log2FC = 1.56, 95% CI = 1.32, 1.83, FDR = 8.2e-6) (Fig. 1C). Features from both columns which annotated to inosine were inversely associated  with  PD  (C18:    log2FC = -0.52,  95%  CI = -0.78, -0.26, FDR = 4.2e-3; HLIIC:   log2FC = -1.23, 95% CI = -1.86, -0.60, FDR = 6.7e-3). In the HILIC column, a series of PD associated  features  annotated  to  multiple  phospholipids,  including  lysophosphatidylcholines  (LysoPC).  For example,  one  of  the  LysoPC(18:1)  species,  which  has been  implicated  in  PD  in  the  past  [25],  was  also  found at higher intensity among patients in both discovery and replication in our population   (log2FC = 0.22, 95% CI = 0.16, 0.29, FDR = 5.8e-8), though the fold change did not pass the 0.25 threshold.

P-cresol and two of its metabolites, p-cresol sulfate and p-cresol  glucuronide,  were  also  found  at  higher  intensity among the PD patients relative to controls (p-cresol log2FC = 0.41,  95%  CI = 0.21,  0.60,  FDR = 2.8e-3).  The  distributions of these metabolites by PD and across discovery and replication populations are shown in Fig. 2A. The p-cresol metabolites were also correlated with age among both PD patients and controls (Fig. 2B). The PD-metabolite  associations however, did not change meaningfully in  the  age-matched  sensitivity  analyses  (Supplemental Table  8).  Furthermore,  p-cresol  glucuronide  was  associated with a higher Hoehn Yahr (HY) stage among PD patients (beta = 0.02, SE = 0.007, FDR = 9.5e-2; Fig. 2C).

Overall,  of  the  PD-associated  features  (MWAS  metap &lt;0.05), seven were also related to HY stage among PD patients  at  an  FDR&lt;0.05  (115  metabolites  associated at p &lt;0.05),  including,  as  expected,  the  PD  medication metabolite, 3-O-methyldopa  (Supplemental Table 9). Six  PD-associated  features  were  also  associated  with UPDRS-III  at  an  FDR&lt;0.05  (100  metabolites  at p &lt;0.05; Supplemental  Table  10).  However,  other  than  the  PD medication  metabolites  and  p-cresol  glucuronide,  the features associated with either HY stage or UPDRS-III up to FDR&lt;0.10 could not be annotated at high confidence.

## Clustering and pathway analysis

Given  the  interdependent  nature  of  metabolites,  we assessed correlation patterns between the PD-associated features.  Figure  3  shows  a  Pearson-correlation  based network of all FDR&lt;0.05 MWAS features from both columns.  Several  highly  correlated  clusters  of  features  are visible, including a PD medication related cluster, a phospholipid  cluster,  and  a  cluster  of  several  features  correlated with p-cresol.

Multiple pathways were also enriched within the MWAS features. Based on metabolic pathway analysis, 17 pathways were significantly overrepresented at FDR&lt;0.05 (58  at p &lt;0.05;  Fig.  4  and  Supplemental  Table  11).  Glutamine  and  glutamate  metabolism,  gabaergic  synapse, methionine and cysteine metabolism, glycine, serine, alanine and threonine metabolism, and leukotriene metabolism were among the most significantly overrepresented pathways. Several phospholipid pathways, including glycerophospholipid  and  glycosphingolipid  metabolism  and phospholipase-d  and  sphingolipid  signaling  pathways, were  also  overrepresented  among  the  PD-associated metabolites.

## Validation of externally associated metabolites

Among  the  50  metabolites  distinguishing  PD  patients and  controls  found  by  Shao  et  al  [7],  we  were  able  to identify 34 that were annotated to the same metabolites based on internal standards or at high confidence. Overall,  20  metabolites validated based on at least one criterion (Table 2 and Fig. 5). Six validated based on all three criteria (significance, direction of effect, and magnitude): p-Cresol  glucuronide,  p-Cresol  sulfate,  phenylacetyl-Lglutamine, trigonelline, biliverdin, and pantothenic acid. These  six  metabolites  demonstrated  the  most  robust associations between the two studies.

Five metabolites were validated based on direction and significance,  but  the    log 2 FC  did  not  reach  ±0.25.  This includes FFA 20:0, which had the highest ranked validation based on the metaDEA pseudo t-score, meaning the fold changes were most similar between the two studies (FC = 0.87  and  FC = 0.88,  see  Table  2).  Nine  metabolites, mostly  free  fatty  acids,  only  agreed  on  significance  but the  studies  reported  opposite  directions  of  effect:  FFA 20:3, FFA 20:4, uridine, FFA 18:2, ubiquinone 1, FFA 14:1, FFA 20:2, FFA 22:5, FFA 19:1.

Results for all 34 metabolites are shown in Supplemental Table 12.

## Discussion

Using high-resolution, untargeted serum metabolic profiling  based on LC-HRMS, we identified 296 metabolite features and 17 metabolic pathways associated with PD, 134 of which had a   log 2 FC greater than ±0.5. Importantly, we  also  assessed  external  validation  of  34  metabolites previously  associated  with  PD  in  an  untargeted  scan  of 226  metabolites  [7].  We  combined  our  results  and  the

p-Creso

p = 7.1e-04

Log2FC=0.38

PEG1

R = 0.3. p = 4.10-07

25- p = 1.3e-04

Fig. 2 P-cresol and two p-cresol metabolites are associated with ( A ) Parkinson's disease, ( B ) age among both PD patients and controls, and (C) Hoehn-Yahr Stage among PD patients

Shao et al. data, the only other large-scale (n&gt;400) untargeted  screen  of  blood-based  metabolite  features  from LCMS.  In  total,  between  the  two  studies,  20  metabolites were highlighted, with six showing the most robust evidence  for  association  when  considering  significance, direction, and magnitude of effect (p-Cresol glucuronide, p-Cresol  sulfate,  phenylacetyl-L-glutamine,  trigonelline, biliverdin, and pantothenic acid).

Our untargeted metabolomics approach broadly implicated  amino  acid  metabolism  and  phospholipid  pathways as important in PD, along with multiple individual metabolites with compelling links to neurodegeneration. Serum  was  collected  from  PD  patients  early  in  disease and compared to community controls. These metabolites and pathways therefore may reflect disturbances due to disease  pathogenesis  and  progression  as  well  as  compensatory or reactive  mechanisms caused by disease or treatment.

One of the strengths of our study is that we assessed metabolite  profiles  from  PD  patients  recruited  early in  disease  who  were  undergoing  a  range  of  treatment courses.  Thus,  we  were  able  to  assess  the  relationship between all metabolite features and levodopa equivalent daily  dose  to  determine  which  features  associated  with PD  were  also  associated  with  medication  use.  Predictably, PD patients differed from controls most strongly in terms of levodopa medication metabolites or metabolites involved in dopamine metabolism. Network analysis further  showed  the  PD  medication  metabolites  clustered together,  as  expected,  but  were  not  significantly  correlated  with  other  PD-related  metabolites.  Several  other pathways and specific metabolites were implicated independent of levodopa medication use. Another noteworthy metabolite that attests to the validity of our analyses is inosine, which is a precursor to urate, with anti-inflammatory properties. We observed inosine at lower intensity among the patients relative to controls. This is in line with previous studies and the notion that lower uric acid level may be involved in faster PD progression, which has led  to  inosine  supplementation  trials  [26-29].  Though these trials have not shown success.

One of the more intriguing findings was p-cresol and its  two  metabolites, p-cresol sulfate and p-cresol glucuronide. We observed higher intensities of the metabolites among  PD  patients  relative  to  controls  in  both  discovery  and  replication  populations.  Furthermore,  this  was external validation for p-cresol sulfate and p-cresol glucuronide, which were also positively associated with PD by  Shao  et  al  [7].  In  fact,  p-cresol  glucuronide  showed the strongest association when combining results across the two studies, with over three-fold difference between patients  and  controls.  Moreover,  the  intensity  of  all three p-cresol metabolites were positively related to age. P-cresol  glucuronide  was  also  related  to  higher  motor symptom scores.

P-cresol  is  an  exogenous  uremic  toxin  primarily  produced by gut bacteria, which express p-cresol synthesizing enzymes that are not produced by human cells. It has been shown to induce oxidative stress and inflammation in vitro [30]. Interestingly, two smaller studies previously found higher levels of p-cresol and p-cresol sulfate in the cerebrospinal fluid of PD patients [7, 31, 32]. Additionally,

\_R = 0.29. p = 1.5p-13

p = 4.6e-06

p = 8.8e-04

p = 2.2e-06

o-Cresol glucuronide p = 3.40-03

Ea Control

p-Cresol glucuronide

Kruskal-Wallis, p = 0.0024

Oxalosuccinate

· p-Cresol sulfate

Fig. 3 Pearson correlation network between MWAS FDR&lt;0.05 metabolites from both the C18 and HILIC columns. |Correlations|≥0.2 shown. Features which were annotated are named to the right, while other features are shown as blank nodes

Number of significant metabolites

Overview of Enriched Pathway

tyrosine metabolism

6- central carbon metabolism in cancer

cysteine and methionine metabolism carbon metabolism

aminoacyl-trna biosynthesis ammonia recycling

glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism sphingolipid metabolism

glycosphingolipid metabolism taste transduction sulfur metabolism

lysine metabolism betaine metabolism

methionine and cysteine metabolismo

Fig. 4 Overview of enriched pathway analysis. Based on pathway analysis of untargeted PD MWAS features using a permutation-based weighted hypergeometric test (R, Metapone: a Bioconductor package for joint pathway testing for untargeted metabolomics data ). Pathways with p &lt;0.05 are shown. Lfdr=the local FDR value for each enrichment

multiple  studies  have  also  linked  p-cresol  with  autism [33-35] and altered brain dopamine metabolism in neurodevelopment [36]. Furthermore, gut dysbiosis has been linked to both PD and autism, including among our own patients  [37],  with  some  research  even  indicating  that misfolded  a-synuclein  retrogradely  propagates  from  the enteric  to  the  central  nervous  system  [38].  The  positive age association with older age we detected in this study has  been  reported  previously  [39].  Interestingly  in  the same  study,  p-cresol  sulfate  levels  were  not  correlated with measured levels of its pre-cursor tyrosine. P-cresol and  its'  metabolites  therefore  represent  compelling  targets for future mechanistic research.

Several tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle metabolites were also implicated as relevant to PD in our MWAS, confirming several previous targeted metabolomics studies [40].

Biliverdin

Trigonelline

Pantothenic acid

Volcano plot of Meta-Analysis Results p-Cresol glucuronide

Created with amanida

Fig. 5 Volcano plot showing the combined fold change and p -values for 34 metabolites associated with PD in Shao et al, 2021 and detected in the current study LCMS data. The meta-analysis was performed using the amanida R package, designed to combine results when only the fold change, p -value, and sample size are available. P -values and   log 2 FC are combined separately to assess validation on direction and magnitude of effect and significance separately, allowing metabolites associated in opposite directions to still be highlighted

PD patients had higher relative abundance of oxoglutaric acid  (e.g.  alpha-ketoglutarate)  and  lower  levels  of  itaconate. Pantothenic acid was inversely associated with PD in both our study and Shao et al, and among the six features that externally validated based on all three criteria. Pantothenic acid is necessary to synthesize coenzyme A (CoA),  which  is  involved  in  the  TCA  cycle  with  alphaketoglutarate. Lower levels of pantothenic acid have been found in several regions of PD brains relative to controls, including  the  cerebellum  and  substantia  nigra  [41].  cisAconitic  acid,  another  TCA  metabolite,  was  also  confirmed in our external validation and meta-analysis.

In  terms  of  itaconate,  aside  from  implications  for energy  metabolism,  highly  pertinent  as  PD  involves mitochondrial  dysfunction,  the  metabolite  holds  key roles  in  immunometabolism  (e.g.,  changes  of  metabolic pathways  within  immune  cells)  [42,  43].  Itaconate  is  a mitochondrial metabolite, produced in high amounts by macrophages and monocytes by diverting aconitate away from the TCA cycle during inflammatory activation [43]. The  primary  function  appears  to  be  anti-inflammatory, supported by human studies showing that low levels of plasma  itaconate  coincide  with  excessive  inflammation [43]. Inflammation and neuroinflammation are principal features  of  PD.  Thus,  it  is  quite  interesting  that  in  both of  our  discovery  and  replication  populations  we  found lower relative levels of this important anti-inflammatory immunometabolite among the PD patients.

We further identified  several  amino  acids  as  differentially abundant in PD. Glutamate and several connected metabolites, including phenylacetyl-L-glutamine (e.g., phenylacetylglutamine)  and  pyroglutamic  acid  (PGA), had  a higher relative  abundance  in  patients'  serum relative  to  controls,  with  the  glutamine  and  glutamate metabolism pathways significantly overrepresented. Phenylacetylglutamine was one of the top metabolites from

Table 2 External validation of metabolites previously associated with PD in an untargeted, comprehensive profiling with 226 metabolite features: Shao et al, 2021 [7] reported 50 metabolites which were differential to PD. Of these 34 were also detected and annotated at high confidence to the same metabolite in our population. Results for 20 of the 34 metabolites associated with PD are shown here, including individual study findings and combined results

## Validation

## amanida Meta-Analysis a metaDEA Meta-Analysis b

## Shao et al. 2021 Table Current Study

## Metabolite

S4

## p value Fold change p value Fold change 95% CI Combined FC Adj combined Mean FC SD pseudo t-score

a Amanida : meta-analysis done using amanida R package, designed to combine results when only the fold change, p -value, and sample size are available. For significance evaluation using the statistic result p -value, amanida uses a weighted p -values combination, which is a variant of Fisher's method. 'A gamma distribution is used to assign non-integral weights proportional to study size to each p -value. The logarithmically transformed fold-change values are averaged with weighting by study size.' Amanida reference [23]

| Direction, Significance, & Magnitude   | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude   | Significance   | Significance   | Significance   | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude   | Significance   | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude   | Significance   | Significance   | Direction & Significance   | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude   | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude   | Significance   | Direction & Significance   | Significance   | Significance   | Direction & Significance   | Direction & Significance   | Direction & Significance   |
| 7.5E-06                                | 2.3E-04                                | 1.8E-06        | 1.4E-04        | 3.0E-03        | 1.5E-03                                | 3.3E-03        | 9.5E-03                                | 3.3E-03        | 9.5E-03        | 1.3E-02                    | 1.8E-03                                | 2.2E-02                                | 1.6E-02        | 1.7E-02                    | 2.3E-03        | 3.3E-02        | 3.3E-02                    | 5.1E-02                    | 2.9E-02                    |
| 1E-05                                  | 8E-05                                  | 0.000          | 0.002          | 0.003          | 0.008                                  | 0.01           | 0.03                                   | 0.03           | 0.04           | 0.05                       | 0.08                                   | 0.09                                   | 0.09           | 0.09                       | 0.17           | 0.18           | 0.19                       | 0.19                       | 0.25                       |
| p -Cresol glucuronide                  | p -Cresol sulfate                      | FFA 20:3       | FFA 20:4       | Uridine        | Phenylacetyl-L-glutamine               | FFA 18:2       | Trigonelline                           | Ubiquinone 1   | FFA 14:1       | Kynurenine                 | Biliverdin                             | Pantothenic acid                       | FFA 20:2       | Indolelactic acid          | FFA 22:5       | FFA 19:1       | Cortisol FFA               | 20:0                       | cis-Aconitic acid          |

b metaDE : meta-analysis done using metaDEA R package, which averages the study-specific log2FCs and calculates the SD. The "pseudo t-score" is the ratio of mean log2FC to the SD of the log2FCs divided by the square root of the number of comparisons. 'This statistic is negative for metabolites with lower abundance and positive for higher abundance and its absolute value will be higher for those metabolites with high and consistent changes across comparisons, and lower for inconsistent and variable fold changes (e.g., upregulated in some datasets and downregulated in others) that are found only in a few comparisons.' metaDEA reference [24]

-value&lt;0.05

&lt;0.25 and combined

Significance: individual study

Direction: individual study fold changes are at least ±5% and directions match between the two studies

Magnitude: Combined   log 2 FC &gt; 0.25 or &lt; -0.25

the  external  validation.  Furthermore,  this  metabolite was also  linked  to  PD  in  a  smaller  metabolomics  study [8].  Phenylacetylglutamine  is  a  gut-microbially  derived metabolite  formed  from  protein  putrefaction  of  phenylalanine  and  tyrosine  by  the  gut  microbiota  [44],  again implicating the gut microbiome in PD.

Pyroglutamic  acid  (PGA)  is  an  endogenous  metabolite  derived  from  glutamate  and  linked  to  glutathione turnover [45, 46]. Elevated serum PGA therefore may be related  to  perturbed  glutathione  metabolism.  Low  levels  of  the  antioxidant  glutathione  are  an  early  neuronal biochemical  finding  in  PD  [47].  But  increased  systemic levels of PGA may reflect an upregulation of glutathione metabolism  to  counter  inflammatory  states  and  oxidative  stress  in  PD.  Furthermore,  the  neurotransmitter glutamate itself has been linked to PD pathogenesis, with several, though not all, studies reporting increased blood-measured levels of glutamate [48, 49].

Other amino acid metabolic pathways, including methionine and cysteine metabolism, glycine, serine, alanine and threonine metabolism, and valine, leucine, and isoleucine degradation were also overrepresented among PD-associated  features,  with  individual  metabolites  like serine,  isoleucine,  and  tryptophan  observed  in  higher relative  abundance among the PD patients. Kynurenine, a metabolite of tryptophan, was one of the top metabolites from our combination of results with Shao et al data. It has diverse functions related to immune activation and regulation  [50,  51].  Two  smaller  metabolomic  studies have also linked kynurenine to PD [52, 53]. The patients also had higher levels of cysteine-S-sulfate, a purportedly brain  damaging  metabolite  involved  in  sulfite  oxidase deficiency  [54].  Branched  chain  amino  acids  (BCAAs), including leucine, isoleucine, and valine, have also been linked to PD, as BCAAs are involved in energy metabolism, preventing oxidative damage, and regulation of protein synthesis [5].

Lipid  pathways  and  metabolites  were  also  implicated with  PD  by  our  MWAS.  Glycerophospholipid  along with glycosphingolipid and sphingolipid metabolism were enriched in  pathway  analyses.  Metabolites  including glycerophosphocholine, several lysophosphotidylcholines  (LysoPC),  and  a  ceramide,  were  all  observed at  higher intensities among the patients relative to controls. The lipid profile in PD has received a great deal of interest in recent years, in part due the identification of GBA variants  in  PD  GWAS.  The  glucosylceramidasebeta  ( GBA )  gene,  which  encodes  the  lysosomal  enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GCase), has directly connected lipid and  sphingolipid  metabolism  to  PD  pathogenesis  [55]. PD  pathogenic  mechanisms  linked  to  lipid  metabolism include oxidative stress, inflammation and immune system  signaling,  pro-apoptotic  processes,  and  interaction with  a-synuclein  biology,  among  others.  Furthermore, alterations in serum, plasma, and brain measured phospholipids  and  sphingolipids  have  been  widely  reported in  PD  [56].  For  instance,  LysoPC(18:1),  implicated  in our MWAS, has also been found at higher levels in the substantia  nigra  in  animal  models  of  PD  [25].  Interestingly,  Cer(d18)  metabolites,  one  of  which  was  observed at higher intensity among our PD patients, have also been associated with physical frailty among older adults [57].

Several free fatty acids (FFA) were also highlighted in our combination with Shao et al., with one species (FFA 20:0)  showing  an  inverse  association  in  both  studies. However, several were confirmed based only on significance,  as  associations  were  in  opposite  directions.  This is  possibly  due  to  L-dopa  use.  L-dopa  has  previously been  reported  to  increase  plasma  FFAs,  while  patients with low serum levels of L-dopa did not show a significant increase in plasma FFAs [58]. Shao et al compared untreated,  drug-naïve  patients  to  controls,  while  our patients were taking varying levels of L-dopa.

Trigonelline and biliverdin were also among the externally  validated  metabolites.  Patients  from  both  populations  had  lower  levels  of  trigonelline,  which  has  shown neuroprotective  action against  PD  along  with  other neurologic  diseases  including  Alzheimer's,  stroke,  and depression [59]. Biliverdin is a breakdown product of the pro-oxidant heme, which is further oxidized to bilirubin. It has been linked to PD in other studies as well, implicating oxidative stress and bile acid pathways [60, 61]. Cortisol was also implicated in the external validation, with patients from both studies showing higher levels. Cortisol  and stress pathways have also been described in PD [62].

Overall,  our  study  is  among  the  largest  untargeted high-resolution  metabolomics study of PD to date with metabolic profiles from independent discovery and replication case-control study populations allowing for validation of associated features. However, a notable limitation of the untargeted LC-HRMS technology is feature annotation.  LC-HRMS  provides  metabolite  features,  many of  which  are  not  identified  and  can  only  be  annotated based on m/z and retention time parameters from large databases (e.g. HMDB) and with consideration of feature correlation structures. While this does allow high confidence annotation, future research will be needed to identify  features  with  certainty.  For  instance,  para-,  ortho-, and  meta-cresol  are  all  isomers.  We  have  labeled  the cresol metabolite as p-cresol due to co-occurrence with the  p-cresol  metabolites,  p-cresol  sulfate  and  p-cresol glucuronide,  and  because  of  the  three  exogenous  isomers, it is produced in humans via gut microbes. However, future studies will be needed to resolve the isomers.

## Funding

National Institute on Aging (K01AG07204401), National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (grant number R21ES032593, 2R01ES010544, R21ES024356, R00ES028743, 5P30ES019776).

## Availability of data and materials

The metabolomics data used in this study  are available on metabolomics workbench under the project title "Untargeted serum metabolomics in the Parkinson's Environment and Genes (PEG) Study".

## Declarations

## Ethics approval and consent to participate

All data presented and experiments described herein are conducted in accordance with the Institutional Review Board of the University of California, Los Angeles. Informed consent was obtained from all study participants.

## Consent for publication

Not applicable.

## Competing interests

Nothing to report.

## Author details

Department of Neurology, UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 2 Department of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 3 Gangarosa Department of Environmental Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. 4 Department of Human Genetics, UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 5 Department of Biostatistics, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 6 Center for Health Policy Research, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 7 Parkinson's Disease Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Greater Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 8 Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

## Received: 2 May 2023   Accepted: 6 December 2023

## Table 1

| 0                                     |
|:--------------------------------------|
| ## C18 Negative                       |
|                                       |
| 232.0282                              |
|                                       |
| 34.8165                               |
|                                       |
| 13.85 (8.73, 21.97)                   |
|                                       |
| 3.27E-24                              |
|                                       |
| 1.24 (1.18, 1.29)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.71E-17                              |
|                                       |
| 1.05E-16                              |
|                                       |
| 1.15E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 8.70E-37                              |
|                                       |
| 8.90E-34                              |
|                                       |
| Dopamine 3-O-sulfate                  |
|                                       |
| 2,3                                   |
|                                       |
| 210.0772                              |
|                                       |
| 35.9778                               |
|                                       |
| 3.49 (2.81, 4.34)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.27E-24                              |
|                                       |
| 1.72 (1.53, 1.94)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.09E-16                              |
|                                       |
| 4.49E-15                              |
|                                       |
| 2.33E-07                              |
|                                       |
| 3.17E-76                              |
|                                       |
| 6.48E-73                              |
|                                       |
| 3-O-Methyldopa 1,2,3                  |
|                                       |
| 128.0353                              |
|                                       |
| 30.6303                               |
|                                       |
| 1.25 (1.18, 1.32)                     |
|                                       |
| 5.61E-11                              |
|                                       |
| 3.79 (2.60, 5.54)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.51E-09                              |
|                                       |
| 4.86E-07                              |
|                                       |
| 1.42E-08                              |
|                                       |
| 1.84E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 7.09E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Pyroglutamic acid/ Pyrrolidonecarbox- |
|                                       |
| ylic   acid                           |
|                                       |
| 1,3                                   |
|                                       |
| 192.0305                              |
|                                       |
| 24.1011                               |
|                                       |
| 1.86 (1.58, 2.18)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.43E-11                              |
|                                       |
| 1.55 (1.36, 1.76)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.81E-08                              |
|                                       |
| 7.84E-10                              |
|                                       |
| 4.42E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.44E-26                              |
|                                       |
| 1.67E-23                              |
|                                       |
| Dopachrome 2,3                        |
|                                       |
| 129.0192                              |
|                                       |
| 33.8177                               |
|                                       |
| 0.79 (0.73, 0.86)                     |
|                                       |
| 2.17E-06                              |
|                                       |
| 0.47 (0.36, 0.61)                     |
|                                       |
| 7.32E-06                              |
|                                       |
| 6.14E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 9.36E-07                              |
|                                       |
| 5.10E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 5.24E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Itaconate (Itaconic acid)             |
|                                       |
| 1,3                                   |
|                                       |
| 435.2514                              |
|                                       |
| 167.2708                              |
|                                       |
| 1.44 (1.25, 1.65)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.94E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 1.62 (1.36, 1.92)                     |
|                                       |
| 8.20E-06                              |
|                                       |
| 1.01E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 8.85E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 1.09E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 3.42E-01                              |
|                                       |
| LPA(0:018:1(9Z)); LPA(18:1(9Z)0:0);   |
|                                       |
| DHAP(18:0)                            |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 199.9693                              |
|                                       |
| 28.4295                               |
|                                       |
| 1.56 (1.39, 1.75)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.43E-11                              |
|                                       |
| 1.56 (1.32, 1.83)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.49E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 7.10E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 2.95E-10                              |
|                                       |
| 1.29E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 6.33E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Cysteine-S-sulfate                    |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 145.0143                              |
|                                       |
| 28.1639                               |
|                                       |
| 1.22 (1.11, 1.35)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.75E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.61 (1.31, 1.98)                     |
|                                       |
| 7.78E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 9.43E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 2.79E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 5.46E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 5.32E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Oxoglutaric   acid                    |
|                                       |
| 1,2,3                                 |
|                                       |
| 146.0459                              |
|                                       |
| 29.4772                               |
|                                       |
| 1.19 (1.10, 1.28)                     |
|                                       |
| 5.47E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 1.86 (1.40, 2.46)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.26E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.98E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 4.24E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 7.60E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 5.94E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Glutamic   acid                       |
|                                       |
| 2,3                                   |
|                                       |
| 283.0821                              |
|                                       |
| 30.1765                               |
|                                       |
| 2.52 (1.67, 3.81)                     |
|                                       |
| 7.82E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 1.10 (1.05, 1.15)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.56E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 3.63E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 5.57E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 8.07E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 9.66E-01                              |
|                                       |
| p-Cresol   glucuronide                |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 256.0936                              |
|                                       |
| 28.4837                               |
|                                       |
| 1.80 (1.39, 2.35)                     |
|                                       |
| 7.82E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 1.14 (1.06, 1.22)                     |
|                                       |
| 7.97E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 4.35E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.03E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 7.59E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 5.94E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Glycerophosphocholine                 |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 107.0502                              |
|                                       |
| 34.5396                               |
|                                       |
| 1.32 (1.16, 1.52)                     |
|                                       |
| 2.80E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.29 (1.13, 1.47)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.08E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 5.43E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 7.76E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.44E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 7.52E-01                              |
|                                       |
| p-Cresol                              |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 267.0723                              |
|                                       |
| 32.8807                               |
|                                       |
| 0.70 (0.58, 0.84)                     |
|                                       |
| 4.15E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 0.82 (0.74, 0.92)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.36E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 1.67E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 3.13E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 2.85E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 4.51E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Inosine                               |
|                                       |
| 2,3                                   |
|                                       |
| 148.0405                              |
|                                       |
| 31.5075                               |
|                                       |
| 1.46 (1.24, 1.72)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.80E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 1.27 (1.12, 1.45)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.41E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 1.12E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 2.23E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 4.38E-20                              |
|                                       |
| 1.49E-17                              |
|                                       |
| 5,6-Dihydroxyindole                   |
|                                       |
| 2,3                                   |
|                                       |
| 187.0071                              |
|                                       |
| 35.7939                               |
|                                       |
| 1.35 (1.17, 1.57)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.50E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.24 (1.10, 1.39)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.77E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 1.03E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 1.06E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 3.46E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 8.40E-01                              |
|                                       |
| p-Cresol   sulfate                    |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 151.0514                              |
|                                       |
| 33.6125                               |
|                                       |
| 0.70 (0.58, 0.85)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.01E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 0.84 (0.77, 0.93)                     |
|                                       |
| 2.21E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 8.23E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.32E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 5.50E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 9.03E-01                              |
|                                       |
| N1-Methyl-4-pyridone-5-carboxamide    |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 172.9914                              |
|                                       |
| 34.1845                               |
|                                       |
| 0.79 (0.67, 0.93)                     |
|                                       |
| 6.08E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 0.83 (0.74, 0.93)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.21E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 4.29E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 4.95E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 3.51E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 8.42E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Phenol   sulphate                     |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 299.2014                              |
|                                       |
| 200.4142                              |
|                                       |
| 1.46 (1.19, 1.79)                     |
|                                       |
| 8.99E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.16 (1.06, 1.26)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.34E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 8.45E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 1.82E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 1.21E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 3.51E-01                              |
|                                       |
| all-trans-Retinoic   acid             |
|                                       |
| 1,3                                   |
|                                       |
| 189.0029                              |
|                                       |
| 34.3209                               |
|                                       |
| 1.40 (1.17, 1.69)                     |
|                                       |
| 8.99E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.17 (1.06, 1.29)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.98E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 3.58E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 1.26E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 2.64E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 7.82E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Oxalosuccinate                        |
|                                       |
| 2,3                                   |
|                                       |
| HILIC Positive                        |
|                                       |
| 212.0917                              |
|                                       |
| 60.9225                               |
|                                       |
| 35.1 (23.0, 53.4)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.51E-50                              |
|                                       |
| 1.43 (1.35, 1.52)                     |
|                                       |
| 4.04E-31                              |
|                                       |
| 1.08E-28                              |
|                                       |
| 5.49E-08                              |
|                                       |
| 3.32E-70                              |
|                                       |
| 9.03E-67                              |
|                                       |
| 3-O-Methyldopa 3                      |
|                                       |
| 185.1285                              |
|                                       |
| 46.3928                               |
|                                       |
| 0.75 (0.69, 0.81)                     |
|                                       |
| 5.21E-10                              |
|                                       |
| 0.42 (0.32, 0.54)                     |
|                                       |
| 3.05E-08                              |
|                                       |
| 1.34E-07                              |
|                                       |
| 3.79E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 2.37E-07                              |
|                                       |
| 1.61E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 4-Methoxytyramine 3                   |
|                                       |
| 510.3557                              |
|                                       |
| 47.829                                |
|                                       |
| 1.16 (1.11, 1.22)                     |
|                                       |
| 5.77E-08                              |
|                                       |
| 4.06 (2.47, 6.65)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.59E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 8.16E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 1.52E-08                              |
|                                       |
| 1.30E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 2.78E-01                              |
|                                       |
| LysoPC(17:0); LysoPE(0:020:0);        |
|                                       |
| LysoPE(20:00:0)                       |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 522.3553                              |
|                                       |
| 48.282                                |
|                                       |
| 1.17 (1.11, 1.22)                     |
|                                       |
| 5.77E-08                              |
|                                       |
| 3.85 (2.37, 6.27)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.79E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 3.98E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 5.78E-09                              |
|                                       |
| 8.25E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.49E-01                              |
|                                       |
| LysoPC(18:1(9Z)); LysoPC(18:1(11Z))   |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 494.3237                              |
|                                       |
| 49.3839                               |
|                                       |
| 1.15 (1.08, 1.21)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.86E-04                              |
|                                       |
| 2.41 (1.64, 3.54)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.16E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.04E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 4.02E-06                              |
|                                       |
| 9.77E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 9.98E-01                              |
|                                       |
| LysoPC(16:1(9Z))                      |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 149.0597                              |
|                                       |
| 60.1071                               |
|                                       |
| 1.17 (1.12, 1.23)                     |
|                                       |
| 5.77E-08                              |
|                                       |
| 3.05 (1.85, 5.03)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.83E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 4.75E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 1.77E-09                              |
|                                       |
| 5.37E-19                              |
|                                       |
| 4.87E-16                              |
|                                       |
| 3-Methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylacetalde-    |
|                                       |
| hyde 2                                |
|                                       |
| 148.0604                              |
|                                       |
| 89.4789                               |
|                                       |
| 1.20 (1.10, 1.30)                     |
|                                       |
| 2.93E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.63 (1.29, 2.08)                     |
|                                       |
| 5.88E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.10E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 8.96E-05                              |
|                                       |
| 1.71E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 6.41E-01                              |
|                                       |
| L-Glutamate                           |
|                                       |
| 1,3                                   |
|                                       |
| 291.0693                              |
|                                       |
| 63.1794                               |
|                                       |
| 0.43 (0.28, 0.66)                     |
|                                       |
| 6.96E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 0.91 (0.87, 0.96)                     |
|                                       |
| 9.37E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.49E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 6.93E-09                              |
|                                       |
| 2.01E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 6.68E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Inosine                               |
|                                       |
| 2                                     |
|                                       |
| 205.0972                              |
|                                       |
| 59.8331                               |
|                                       |
| 0.92 (0.88, 0.96)                     |
|                                       |
| 1.40E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 0.46 (0.30, 0.71)                     |
|                                       |
| 2.06E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 3.15E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 4.40E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 7.25E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 9.39E-01                              |
|                                       |
| D-Tryptophan 2,3                      |
|                                       |
| 244.1542                              |
|                                       |
| 37.5565                               |
|                                       |
| 0.82 (0.74, 0.92)                     |
|                                       |
| 2.23E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 0.75 (0.64, 0.89)                     |
|                                       |
| 2.62E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 7.84E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.02E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 7.77E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 9.50E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Tiglylcarnitine                       |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |
|                                       |
| 620.5915                              |
|                                       |
| 68.302                                |
|                                       |
| 1.15 (1.07, 1.24)                     |
|                                       |
| 9.81E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 1.46 (1.15, 1.86)                     |
|                                       |
| 5.05E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 5.77E-02                              |
|                                       |
| 1.62E-03                              |
|                                       |
| 2.66E-01                              |
|                                       |
| 7.40E-01                              |
|                                       |
| Cer(d18:122:1(13Z))                   |
|                                       |
| 3                                     |

## Table 2

| 0                                    | 1                                    | 2            | 3            | 4            | 5                                    | 6            | 7                                    | 8            | 9            | 10                       | 11                                   | 12                                   | 13           | 14                       | 15           | 16           | 17                       | 18                       | 19                       |
|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------|:-------------|:-------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------|:-------------|:-------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|:-------------|:-------------------------|:-------------|:-------------|:-------------------------|:-------------------------|:-------------------------|
| Direction, Significance, & Magnitude | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude | Significance | Significance | Significance | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude | Significance | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude | Significance | Significance | Direction & Significance | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude | Direction, Significance, & Magnitude | Significance | Direction & Significance | Significance | Significance | Direction & Significance | Direction & Significance | Direction & Significance |
| 3.688                                | 1.426                                | -0.381       | -0.445       | 0.274        | 3.254                                | -0.334       | -2.966                               | -0.359       | -0.079       | -2.855                   | -11.837                              | -5.440                               | -0.415       | -2.620                   | -0.686       | -0.280       | 3.932                    | -23.371                  | -3.602                   |
| 1.50                                 | 1.29                                 | 1.60         | 1.52         | 1.20         | 1.16                                 | 1.40         | 1.25                                 | 1.39         | 1.41         | 1.06                     | 1.04                                 | 1.05                                 | 1.32         | 1.09                     | 1.47         | 1.32         | 1.06                     | 1.01                     | 1.06                     |
| 2.86                                 | 1.29                                 | 0.88         | 0.88         | 1.04         | 1.41                                 | 0.92         | 0.62                                 | 0.92         | 0.98         | 0.89                     | 0.72                                 | 0.82                                 | 0.92         | 0.86                     | 0.83         | 0.95         | 1.16                     | 0.87                     | 0.86                     |
| 7.5E-06                              | 2.3E-04                              | 1.8E-06      | 1.4E-04      | 3.0E-03      | 1.5E-03                              | 3.3E-03      | 9.5E-03                              | 3.3E-03      | 9.5E-03      | 1.3E-02                  | 1.8E-03                              | 2.2E-02                              | 1.6E-02      | 1.7E-02                  | 2.3E-03      | 3.3E-02      | 3.3E-02                  | 5.1E-02                  | 2.9E-02                  |
| 3.14                                 | 1.37                                 | 0.98         | 0.97         | 1.08         | 1.36                                 | 1.00         | 0.66                                 | 0.99         | 1.06         | 0.91                     | 0.73                                 | 0.81                                 | 0.98         | 0.88                     | 0.91         | 1.01         | 1.15                     | 0.88                     | 0.88                     |
| 2.10, 6.90                           | 1.25, 1.93                           | 1.10, 1.36   | 1.06, 1.31   | 1.06, 1.31   | 1.06, 1.51                           | 1.04, 1.31   | 0.55, 0.97                           | 1.01, 1.34   | 1.01, 1.53   | 0.86, 1.00               | 0.52, 1.04                           | 0.61, 1.03                           | 0.98, 1.28   | 0.82, 1.02               | 0.97, 1.22   | 0.94, 1.40   | 0.94, 1.33               | 0.72, 1.07               | 0.75, 1.08               |
| 3.80                                 | 1.55                                 | 1.23         | 1.18         | 1.18         | 1.27                                 | 1.17         | 0.73                                 | 1.16         | 1.25         | 0.93                     | 0.74                                 | 0.79                                 | 1.12         | 0.91                     | 1.09         | 1.15         | 1.12                     | 0.88                     | 0.90                     |
| 1E-05                                | 8E-05                                | 0.000        | 0.002        | 0.003        | 0.008                                | 0.01         | 0.03                                 | 0.03         | 0.04         | 0.05                     | 0.08                                 | 0.09                                 | 0.09         | 0.09                     | 0.17         | 0.18         | 0.19                     | 0.19                     | 0.25                     |
| 2.15                                 | 1.08                                 | 0.63         | 0.65         | 0.91         | 1.57                                 | 0.73         | 0.53                                 | 0.73         | 0.77         | 0.86                     | 0.7                                  | 0.85                                 | 0.76         | 0.81                     | 0.63         | 0.78         | 1.21                     | 0.87                     | 0.83                     |
| 0.0021                               | 0.0278                               | 0.0000       | 0.0004       | 0.0300       | 0.0023                               | 0.0106       | 0.0119                               | 0.0030       | 0.0100       | 0.0113                   | 0.0003                               | 0.0174                               | 0.0090       | 0.0109                   | 0.0002       | 0.0179       | 0.0165                   | 0.0307                   | 0.0078                   |
| p -Cresol glucuronide                | p -Cresol sulfate                    | FFA 20:3     | FFA 20:4     | Uridine      | Phenylacetyl-L-glutamine             | FFA 18:2     | Trigonelline                         | Ubiquinone 1 | FFA 14:1     | Kynurenine               | Biliverdin                           | Pantothenic acid                     | FFA 20:2     | Indolelactic acid        | FFA 22:5     | FFA 19:1     | Cortisol FFA             | 20:0                     | cis-Aconitic acid        |