## Unraveling the Relation of Parkinson's Disease and Metabolites: A Combined Analysis of Stool and Plasma Metabolites Based on Untargeted Metabolomics Technology

Sufang Liu 1,2 |  Qiang Zhao 1,2 |  Jie Tang 1,2 |  Xianhong Li 1,2 |  Juan Wang 1   |  Yuting Zhao 2 |  Zhengting Yang 2   |  Xin Pan 1 | Rui Xiang 1   |  Jing Tian 2 |  Puqing Wang 1,2

1 Department of Neurology, Xiangyang No. 1 People's Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, Xiangyang, Hubei, China  | 2 Hubei Provincial Clinical Research Center for Parkinson's Disease, Xiangyang Key Laboratory of Movement Disorders, Xiangyang No. 1 People's Hospital, Hubei University of Medicine, Xiangyang, Hubei, China

Correspondence: Jing Tian (15030662@qq.com)  |  Puqing Wang (wpq20110328@qq.com)

Received: 26 August 2024  | Revised: 4 April 2025  | Accepted: 26 April 2025

Funding: This study was supported by the Hubei Science and Technology Project (2023BCB140), Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2022CFB341 and 2023AFD045).

Keywords: biomarkers | intestinal inflammation | intestinal permeability | Parkinson's disease | untargeted metabolomics

## ABSTRACT

Objective: Metabolomics technology has been widely utilized to uncover the action mechanisms of Parkinson's Disease (PD) and to identify PD-  related biomarkers. In this study, we compared plasma and fecal metabolite levels between PD patients and their healthy spouses (HS), aiming to identify the associations of differential metabolites with intestinal inflammation, intestinal barrier function, and clinical characteristics of PD.

Methods: Untargeted metabolomics techniques were used to characterize plasma and fecal metabolite profiles. We identified metabolites with elevated plasma levels in PD patients, while no significant differences were observed in fecal samples. Partial correlation analysis was employed to investigate the associations between these metabolites, markers of intestinal inflammation (calprotectin and lactoferrin), markers of intestinal permeability (α-  1-  antitrypsin and zonulin), and clinical characteristics of PD patients.

Results: The study identified ten metabolites that were significantly elevated in the plasma of PD patients compared to HS ( p &lt;  0.05), while their fecal concentrations did not differ significantly. Correlation analysis revealed that elevated levels of differential metabolites in the plasma of PD patients were associated with increased intestinal permeability and inflammation. Furthermore, five metabolites, including 3,4-  Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-  sulfate and Propyl gallate, were linked to PD symptoms. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves demonstrated that these metabolites could effectively distinguish between PD patients and HS, with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.94, indicating excellent predictive performance.

Conclusions: This study identified significant metabolite alterations in PD patients and revealed their associations with intestinal barrier dysfunction and clinical characteristics of the disease.

## 1   |   Introduction

Parkinson's Disease (PD) is a rapidly growing neurodegenerative disorder worldwide in terms of both mortality and prevalence.

Sufang Liu and Qiang Zhao contributed equally to this work.

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

© 2025 The Author(s). CNS Neuroscience &amp; Therapeutics published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

According to the Global Burden of Disease study, approximately 6.1 million people suffer from PD globally [1]. PD is clinically characterized by motor symptoms such as static tremor, slow movement, rigidity, and postural instability [2]. Notably, many

PD patients experience non-  motor symptoms, such as sleep disorders, reduced sense of smell, and persistent constipation, up to 10-20 years before the onset of motor symptoms, with constipation being particularly prevalent [3]. Prospective studies have reported that individuals with chronic constipation have a 6-to 19-  fold increased risk of developing PD within 10 years [4, 5]. In  2003,  Braak  [6]  first  proposed  the  gut-  brain  axis  hypothesis, which was later corroborated by Sangjune Kim et al. [7] in 2019 through animal studies, highlighting the role of a healthy intestinal environment in maintaining metabolite homeostasis and intestinal barrier integrity. Our previous clinical research identified that there were significant differences in intestinal microbes between PD patients and healthy spouses (HS), and these differences were correlated with clinical characteristics [8-10]. However, research reports on the mechanisms behind the roles of various microorganisms in PD often show inconsistencies.  Some  scholars  have  proposed  that  metabolites,  as important  intermediates  between  microorganisms  and  hosts, can play a role in the pathogenesis of PD by promoting the proinflammatory environment, oxidative stress, and calcium homeostasis disruption in the gut [11, 12]. For example, Uric acid is involved in the oxidative stress pathway [13, 14], tryptophan is  related  to  energy  metabolism  [15],  lipopolysaccharide  can enhance pro-  inflammatory response [16], and short-  chain fatty acids regulate intestinal permeability [17-19]. However, conclusions are disputed in different studies.

Metabolomic analysis using liquid chromatography-  mass spectrometry (LC-MS) has recently gained recognition for its role in understanding the human gut microbiome [20]. This approach can reflect the pathophysiological process of the diseases by revealing the overall trajectory of metabolite changes in the body under  the  influence  of  intrinsic  and  extrinsic  factors.  Studies on the gut microbiome-  metabolome relationship in PD patients have typically focused on single-  sample analyses of either stool or  plasma  [21].  Recent  studies  have  shown  that  while  shortchain fatty acids (SCFAs) are present in low concentrations in stool, they are elevated in plasma, possibly due to compromised intestinal barrier function [18, 19]. Epidemiological studies indicate that individuals with inflammatory bowel disease face a significantly higher risk of PD compared to healthy individuals [22]. A stable intestinal environment is crucial for maintaining barrier integrity, and its disruption can cause an 'intestinal leakage  phenomenon'  and  aggravate  the  systemic  inflammatory response [23]. David Devos [24] conducted biopsies on the intestinal tissues of participants in the trial and revealed significantly elevated intestinal  inflammation in PD patients. Additionally, studies  by  Forsyth  and  Salat-  Foix  [25,  26]  using  oral  administration  of  unmetabolized  sugars  showed  that  PD  patients demonstrated increased intestinal permeability. Elevated levels of  established markers of intestinal inflammation and permeability,  such  as  α-  1-  antitrypsin,  zonulin,  calprotectin,  and  lactoferrin, were found in the stools of PD patients [27, 28]. These findings underscore the potential role of intestinal metabolites, inflammation, and permeability in PD's pathophysiology.

Based on the above information, we hypothesize that if metabolite levels in the gut remain relatively stable but are elevated in plasma, this may be due to their translocation into the bloodstream through a compromised intestinal barrier. To investigate this,  we  collected  plasma  and  fecal  samples  from  PD  patients and  HS  simultaneously.  Using  the  untargeted  metabolomics approach of LC-MS, we studied the differences in plasma and fecal metabolite levels between the two groups, and explored the relationship between the differential metabolites and markers of intestinal inflammation and permeability with a goal of identifying reliable biomarkers and elucidating their potential mechanisms in the development of PD.

## 2   |   Methods

## 2.1   |   Participant Inclusion

We recruited 55 PD patients from the Department of Neurology of  Xiangyang  First  People's  Hospital,  affiliated  with  Hubei University of Medicine, as the clinical trial group. The diagnoses of PD were confirmed by two specialists in Parkinson's disease according to the Movement Disorder Society Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for PD [29]. Simultaneously, we recruited 55 HS who have been living with the PD patients for a long time to serve as the healthy control group. This approach was to minimize potential confounding factors such as diet, lifestyle, and living conditions.

Patient  exclusion  criteria:  (1)  Parkinsonism-  plus  syndrome  or secondary  Parkinsonism  syndrome;  (2)  inflammatory  bowel syndrome; (3)  psychiatric  illness;  (4)  diabetes,  gastrointestinal disease, surgical history, or infectious diseases; (5) antibiotics/ probiotics used for nearly 3 months.

Healthy spouses (HS, n =  55) lived in the same household with PD patients. Exclusion criteria for healthy spouses were as follows: (1) obvious digestive diseases (history of gastrointestinal surgery or severe infection); (2) psychiatric illness and neurodegenerative disease; (3) use of antibiotics/probiotics for nearly 3 months; and (4) history of going out of Xiangyang city (&gt; 5 days) in the last 6 months.

## 2.2   |   Clinical Characteristics Evaluation

In addition to demographic data, such as height, weight, gender,  Body  Mass  Index  (BMI),  and  Rapid  Eating  Assessment for  Participants-Shortened  Version  (REAP-  S),  we  assessed various clinical characteristics, including olfactory function, sleep quality, constipation, cognitive function, and quality of life.  These  evaluations  were  conducted  using  the  Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA), Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD), Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (MOCA),  Hyposmia  rating scale, Rome III Criteria for Functional Constipation (ROMAIII),  REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Screening Questionnaire (RBDSQ),  Non-  Motor  Symptoms  Questionnaire  (NMSQ), and  the  39-  item  Parkinson's  Disease  Questionnaire  (PDQ39).  Thirty-  seven  PD  patients  underwent  Motor  Symptoms Evaluation  using  the  Movement  Disorder  Society  Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-  UPDRS) Part III and Hoehn &amp; Yahr (H &amp; Y) staging during the 'off' period to assess the severity of motor symptoms. The daily dosage of PD medication was converted into the levodopa equivalent daily dose (LEDD) [30]. All participants provided written informed consent, and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Xiangyang First People's Hospital.

## 2.3   |   Collection and Processing of Biological Samples

(1)  Blood  samples  were  collected  in  the  morning  after  participants fasted for at least 10 h. Fasting venous blood was obtained via  direct  venipuncture  into  purple  vacuum  tubes  containing EDTA anticoagulant. The samples were then centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min at 3000 rpm to ensure the plasma was free of hemolysis. The upper layer of plasma was carefully extracted using a sterile technique, aliquoted into sterile tubes, and stored at -80°C until further analysis. (2) Fecal samples were collected in sterile containers and subsequently transferred into sterile tubes using a sterile scoop, snap-  frozen with liquid nitrogen, and then stored in  a -80°C  refrigerator.  To  prevent  changes  in  metabolite  levels, the collection and treatment of feces were controlled within 1  h. In this study, plasma and fecal samples from 55 PD patients and 55 HS were collected for untargeted metabolomics analysis. However, due to sample contamination and insufficient quantity, intestinal  permeability  and  inflammatory  markers  were  only tested in 42 stool samples from both the PD and HS groups.

## 2.4   |   Metabolomics Detection

Waters  UPLC  I-  Class  Plus  (Waters,  USA)  in  tandem  with  Q Exactive  high-  resolution  mass  spectrometer  (Thermo  Fisher Scientific,  USA)  was  used  for  the  separation  and  detection  of metabolites.  Metabolite  extracts  were  analyzed  using  a  BEH C18 column under gradient elution conditions. For positive ion mode, the mobile phases included 0.1% formic acid in aqueous solution  and  0.1%  formic  acid  in  methanol.  For  negative  ion mode,  the  mobile  phases  were  10 mM  ammonium  formate  in aqueous solution and 10 mM ammonium formate in 95% methanol. Both primary and secondary mass spectrometry data acquisition were performed using the Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Detailed  chromatographic  and  mass  spectrometry  conditions are provided in the Supporting Information.

Data  processing  was  performed  using  Compound  Discoverer 3.3  software  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  USA),  in  conjunction with  the  BGI  Metabolome  Database  (BMDB).  Following  data analysis with BMDB, mzCloud, and ChemSpider databases, a data matrix containing metabolite peak areas and identification results was generated. This matrix was subsequently imported into  metaX  for  data  preprocessing,  with  normalization  carried out using the Probabilistic Quotient Normalization (PQN) method. The relative peak areas were calculated, and batch effects were corrected using Quality Control-  based Robust LOESS Signal Correction (QC-  RLSC). Compounds with a coefficient of variation (CV) greater than 30% in relative peak area across all QC samples were excluded from the analysis.

## 2.5   |   Inflammatory and Permeability Markers Measurements

The  markers  of  intestinal  inflammation  (calprotectin/lactoferrin) concentrations were determined by enzyme-  linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (F9913-  A/F1241-  A, Fankew, Shanghai Kexing Trading Co. Ltd). Markers of intestinal permeability in fecal samples were measured using the Zonulin ELISA Research

Kit and Alpha-  1-  antitrypsin ELISA Research Kit (F10869-  A and F10535-  A, Fankew, Shanghai Kexing Trading Co. Ltd) following the respective protocols provided by the manufacturer.

## 2.6   |   Combined Analysis

A combined analysis of the plasma and fecal metabolites was performed on two participant groups ( n =  110). Metabolites that were significantly increased in the plasma of PD patients but not elevated in the feces compared to HS were identified. These differential metabolites were then integrated with the biomarker protein levels ( n =  84) and clinical parameters. Metabolites that showed a significant positive correlation with both the biomarker proteins and clinical features were selected. These metabolites were subsequently used as features to develop a predictive model for PD.

## 2.7   |   Statistical Analysis

The  Shapiro-Wilk  test  was  used  to  assess  the  normality  of  the data, while the Levene test was used to evaluate the homogeneity of variance. For continuous variables, the mean ± standard deviation was expressed. Two samples with normal distribution and homogeneity  of  variance  were  compared  using  the T -  test.  For non-  normally  distributed  data,  the Wilcoxon  rank  sum  test  was applied. To control the false discovery rate (FDR) caused by multiple testing, the Benjamini-  Hochberg method was used, with FDR &lt; 0.05  considered  statistically  significant.  Categorical  variables were presented as frequencies (percentages), and the differences between the two groups were compared using the chi-  square test ( p &lt;  0.05 was considered significant). The correlation between the differential metabolites and marker proteins was evaluated by the nonparametric Spearman rank correlation coefficient. Partial correlation analysis between differential metabolites and clinical parameters was performed, and corrections were made for age, BMI, and LEDD (FDR &lt; 0.05 was considered significant). Correlation analysis and heat maps were generated using the corrplot package in R (version 0.92). The differential metabolites that were significantly positively correlated with both marker proteins and clinical features were used as features to construct a Parkinson's disease prediction model. The model was developed using the random forest  algorithm  in  sklearn  (n\_estimators = 150,  random\_state = 1), and the model was validated using five-  fold cross-  validation.

Demographic analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics version 25.0.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA), and the significance levels were set at 0.05 (2-  tailed). All statistical analyses in this study, except for demographic analysis, were performed in  the  Anaconda  202,303  Python  package  pingouin  (version 0.5.3), and all graphics were generated by R (version 4.1.3).

## 3   |   Results

## 3.1   |   The Demographics and Clinical Characteristics of Participants

Due to the incomplete basic information of 5 patients, we only collected and analyzed the basic information of 50 PD patients and  50  HS.  The  basic  demographic  characteristics,  including

age and BMI, were similar between PD patients and HS. The dietary assessment scale (REAP-  S) showed no differences in diet between the two groups. In the PD group, the mean H&amp;Y stage was 2.61 ± 0.91, with a disease duration of 6.45 ± 4.02 years; the MDS-  UPDRS part III score was 46.83 ± 17.06. Additional clinical  characteristics  of  study  participants  are  summarized  in Table 1.

TABLE 1 |    Demographic and clinical characteristics of participants.

|                          | Patients with PD ( N =50)   | Healthy spouses (HS) ( N =50)   |     p |
| Age, years               | 67.30±6.13                  | 66.78±7.50                      | 0.705 |
| Sex, male ( n , %)       | 31 (62.0)                   | 30 (60.0)                       | 0.838 |
| Height (cm)              | 1.65±0.06                   | 1.626±0.06                      | 0.083 |
| Weight (Kg)              | 63.43±8.62                  | 62.46±8.56                      | 0.574 |
| BMI (kg/m 2 )            | 23.40±3.05                  | 23.64±3.20                      | 0.701 |
| REAP-S (mean)            | 32.56±2.71                  | 32.26±2.47                      | 0.565 |
| Disease duration (y)     | 6.45±4.02                   | NA                              |       |
| LEDD (mg)                | 583.45±402.44               | NA                              |       |
| MDS-UPDRS Part I score   | 12.68±6.61                  | NA                              |       |
| MDS-UPDRS Part II score  | 16.98±9.58                  | NA                              |       |
| MDS-UPDRS Part III score | 46.83±17.06                 | NA                              |       |
| HAMAscore                | 7.88±7.27                   | NA                              |       |
| HAMDscore                | 9.00±6.64                   | NA                              |       |
| MoCA score               | 19.92±6.13                  | NA                              |       |
| ROMA-III, Y( n , %)      | 32 (64.0)                   | NA                              |       |
| Hyposmia rating scale    | 17.35±8.36                  | NA                              |       |
| H&Y stage                | 2.61±0.91                   | NA                              |       |
| RBDSQ                    | 4.34±3.33                   | NA                              |       |
| NMSQscore                | 12.68±5.24                  | NA                              |       |
| PDQ-39                   | 41.40±22.85                 | NA                              |       |

Note: Data are shown as mean ± standard deviation or n (%). Comparisons between groups were assessed with the Student's t -  test or Mann-Whitney U test for quantitative variables and the Chi-  Squared test for categorical variables. p value represents where differences in the characteristics between PD and HS were detected.

Abbreviations: BMI, body mass index; HAMA, Hamilton Anxiety Scale; HAMD, Hamilton Depression Scale; H&amp;Y stage, Hoehn and Yahr stage; LEDD, levodopa equivalent daily dose; MDS-  UPDRS, Movement Disorder Society-  sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale; MoCA, Montreal cognitive assessment; NA, not available; NMSQ, Non-  Motor Symptoms Questionnaire; PD, Parkinson's disease; PDQ-  39, The 39-  item Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire; RBDSQ, REM Sleep Behavior Disorder Screening Questionnaire; REAP-  S, Rapid Eating Assessment for Participants-Shortened Version; ROMA-  III, Rome III Criteria for Functional Constipation.

## 3.2   |   Comparison of Plasma and Fecal Metabolite Levels Between PD and HS

We  performed  untargeted  metabolomics  analysis  on  110 plasma  samples  (PD = 55,  HS = 55)  and  110  fecal  samples (PD = 55,  HS = 55)  from  all  participants,  and  compared  their metabolites between PD patients and HS using t -  tests. Fortyfive plasma metabolites were identified to be significantly elevated in PD patients compared to HS ( p &lt;  0.05). Among these, 10  metabolites,  including  3-  Methoxytyrosine,  Tropinone,  NAcetyl-  L-  tyrosine,  Propyl  gallate,  and  (+)-  Vulgraon  B,  were significantly overexpressed in the plasma compared with the HS group, but there was no significant difference in the fecal samples between the two groups (Table 2, Figure 1).

## 3.3   |   Comparison of Intestinal Permeability and Intestinal Inflammation Markers Between PD and HS

The  ten  metabolites  that  were  significantly  elevated  in  the plasma of  PD  patients  but  not  in  their  feces  may  reflect  increased intestinal permeability due to compromised intestinal barrier damage in these patients. To further assess intestinal barrier integrity, we measured markers of intestinal permeability and inflammation. Some fecal samples were insufficient in quantity due to contamination and other factors. Therefore, we only used 84 samples (PD = 42, HS = 42) from the abovementioned  participants  for  the  measurement  of  biomarkers. Significant elevations were observed in intestinal inflammatory markers in the PD group compared to HS. Specifically, lactoferrin  levels  (PD:  1003.383 μg/g  vs.  HS:  748.077 μg/g, FDR  &lt; 0.01;  Figure  2A)  and  calprotectin  (PD:  143.863 μg/g vs.  HS:  106.368 μg/g,  FDR  &lt; 0.01;  Figure  2B)  were  significantly  elevated  in  the  PD  group.  Similarly,  levels  of  intestinal  permeability  markers  α-  1-  antitrypsin  (PD:  63.689 μg/g

TABLE 2 |    Metabolites were significantly elevated in plasma but not in feces between PD and HS.

| Metabolite                                         |        p |    FDR a |
| 3-Methoxytyrosine                                  | 1.16e-20 | 7.05e-20 |
| Tropinone                                          | 9.32e-05 | 0        |
| N-Acetyl-L-tyrosine                                | 1.89e-05 | 0        |
| Propyl gallate                                     | 2.17e-18 | 1.99e-16 |
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-sulfate                | 4.97e-19 | 6.08e-17 |
| 1 (3H)-Isobenzofuranone, 3-butylidene-             | 0        | 0.02     |
| 2-Amino-9-(6-aminopurin-9-yl)-1H- purin-6-one      | 0        | 0        |
| NP-019988                                          | 1.55e-21 | 4.69e-19 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4- ylcarbothioyl) carbamate | 6.1e-09  | 6.16e-07 |
| (+)-Vulgraon B                                     | 8.81e-05 | 0        |

a FDR is controlled by the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

HS

FIGURE 1 |    Differential abundance of plasma metabolites between the PD and HS groups is visualized through violin plots. The plots illustrate the distribution patterns of ten significantly altered metabolites: (A) N-  Acetyl-  L-  tyrosine, (B) 3,4-  Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-  sulfate, (C) Propyl gallate, (D) 3-  Methoxytyrosine, (E) (+)-  Vulgraon B, (F) Ethyl N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl)carbamate, (G) Tropinone, (H) NP-  019988, (I) 1(3H)Isobenzofuranone,3-  butylidene-  , and (J) 2-  Amino-  9-  (6-  aminopurin-  9-  yl)-  1H-  purin-  6-  one. Statistical significance is denoted as follows: *FDR &lt; 0.05, **FDR &lt; 0.01, ***FDR ≤ 0.001.

vs. HS: 48.444 μg/g, FDR &lt; 0.01; Figure 2C) and zonulin (PD: 61.320 μg/g vs. HS: 45.811 μg/g, FDR &lt; 0.01; Figure 2D) were significantly higher in PD patients compared to HS.

Spearman correlation analysis was conducted to examine the relationship between the ten differential plasma metabolites and markers of intestinal permeability and inflammation in the feces of  PD  patients.  The  results  indicated  that  levels  of  seven  plasma  metabolites in PD patients-including 3,4-  Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-  sulfate,  Propyl  gallate,  (+)-  Vulgraon  B,  3-  Methoxytyrosine, Ethyl N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl) carbamate, NP-  019988, and  N-  Acetyl-  L-  tyrosine-were  significantly  correlated  with increased  intestinal  permeability  and  inflammation(Table  3, Figure 3).

## 3.4   |   Correlations Between Differential Plasma Metabolites and Clinical Characteristics in PD Patients

Given  that  3-  Methoxytyrosine  levels  might  be  influenced  by anti-  Parkinson's  medications,  we  focused  on  the  remaining six  differential  metabolites  and  their  associations  with  clinical features. A partial correlation analysis was conducted, adjusting  for  age,  BMI,  and  LEDD  (Figure  4).  The  associations between  differential  metabolites  and  whether  PD  patients  experienced  constipation  are  summarized  in  Table  4.  We  found that  3,4-  Dihydroxyphenylglycol  O-  sulfate,  Propyl  gallate,  NP019988, and Ethyl N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl) carbamate were  significantly  positively  correlated  with  disease  duration.

FIGURE  2 |    Comparative analysis of intestinal inflammation and  permeability  biomarkers  in  PD  patients  and  HS  subjects.  (A,  B) Quantification of intestinal  inflammation biomarkers: (A) lactoferrin (FDR = 1.64 × 10 -11 )  and  (B)  calprotectin  (FDR = 1.64 × 10 -11 ).  (C,  D) Assessment of intestinal barrier integrity markers: (C) α-  1-  antitrypsin (FDR = 1.33 × 10 -10 ) and (D) zonulin (FDR = 2.10 × 10 -11 ). Statistical significance is denoted as ***FDR ≤ 0.001.

Additionally,  Propyl  gallate  showed  positive  correlations  with constipation,  HAMA,  MDS-  UPDRS  part  III  (on),  and  H&amp;Y stage.  Ethyl  N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl)  carbamate  was positively  correlated  with  MDS-  UPDRS  part  I,  II,  and  III(on) scores, as well as the NMSQ. The concentration of NP-  019988 correlated with the constipation, H&amp;Y stage, PDQ-  39, and MDSUPDRS part II. Detailed correlation results are provided in the Supporting  Information  (Table  5).  (+)-  Vulgraon  B  showed  no significant correlation with any of the measures and therefore will not be included in subsequent studies.

## 3.5   |   Discriminant Model Establishment

To further explore the potential clinical utility of the identified metabolites, we constructed a predictive model for PD using the five remaining differential metabolites. The model achieved an area  under  the  curve  (AUC)  of  0.94,  demonstrating  excellent predictive  performance  (Figure  5A).  Although  two  of  these metabolites, Propyl gallate and N-  Acetyl-  L-  tyrosine, have been reported in other diseases, they still exhibited strong discriminatory power for distinguishing PD patients from healthy controls, with an AUC of 0.91 (Figure 5B).

## 4   |   Discussion

This study is the first to employ untargeted metabolomics to identify metabolites that showed no differences in stool samples between PD patients and HS, but were significantly elevated in the plasma of PD patients and investigated the relationships between

TABLE 3 |    Association  of  differential  metabolites  with  markers  of intestinal permeability and inflammation levels.

| Metabolite                | Protein a       |   R b |    p |
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol | Calprotectin    |  0.43 | 0    |
| O-sulfate                 | Lactoferrin     |  0.49 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         |  0.4  | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin |  0.42 | 0    |
| Propyl gallate            | Calprotectin    |  0.48 | 0    |
|                           | Lactoferrin     |  0.53 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         |  0.47 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin |  0.46 | 0    |
| (+)-Vulgraon B            | Calprotectin    |  0.39 | 0    |
|                           | Lactoferrin     |  0.34 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         |  0.34 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin |  0.36 | 0    |
| 3-Methoxytyrosine         | Calprotectin    |  0.53 | 0    |
|                           | Lactoferrin     |  0.56 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         |  0.48 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin |  0.5  | 0    |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4- | Calprotectin    |  0.41 | 0    |
| ylcarbothioyl) carbamate  | Lactoferrin     |  0.44 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         |  0.36 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin |  0.41 | 0    |
| N-Acetyl-L-tyrosine       | Calprotectin    |  0.27 | 0.02 |
|                           | Lactoferrin     |  0.27 | 0.02 |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin |  0.3  | 0.01 |
| NP-019988                 | Calprotectin    |  0.51 | 0    |
|                           | Lactoferrin     |  0.52 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         |  0.46 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin |  0.48 | 0    |

intestinal permeability, inflammation levels, clinical characteristics, and these differential metabolites. We identified ten metabolites that were exclusively elevated in the plasma of PD patients. Among  these,  seven  metabolites  were  linked  to  increased  intestinal  permeability  and  higher  inflammation  levels.  Notably, markers of intestinal permeability and inflammation were significantly higher in PD patients compared to HS. This supports our hypothesis that the differences in the metabolites mentioned above may be due to entry into the bloodstream through the damaged intestinal barrier. Furthermore, we developed a predictive model  using  five  metabolites,  including  Propyl  gallate  and  Ncetyl-  L-  tyrosine, achieving a diagnostic accuracy of 94% for PD. This model shows significant potential for clinical application in the future.

The  intestinal  barrier  is  a  regulatory  barrier  formed  by  tight junctions  between  intestinal  epithelial  cells.  Located  between the bloodstream and the contents of the intestine, this barrier serves  several  essential  functions:  it  prevents  harmful  substances from entering the bloodstream, supports the absorption of nutrients, and aids in eliminating waste [31]. In a longitudinal cohort study, Villumsen et al. [32] revealed that patients with inflammatory bowel disease were at higher risk of developing PD after long-  term follow-  up. Based on this, it is proposed that PD may be initiated by damage to the intestinal barrier, triggering inflammation-  induced increases in intestinal permeability

FIGURE 3 |    Spearman  correlation  analysis  between  differentially abundant plasma metabolites and intestinal biomarkers visualized as a heatmap. The correlation matrix depicts the strength and direction of associations, with red indicating positive coefficients and blue indicating negative coefficients. The statistical significance of correlations is denoted as follows: * p &lt;  0.05, ** p &lt;  0.01, *** p &lt;  0.001.

that could lead to greater exposure of the enteric nervous system (ENS) to the microbiome and its toxic products [33].

PD is also known for Inflammatory crosstalk between the gutbrain axis pathway [34, 35]. Fecal calprotectin and lactoferrin serve as sensitive markers of intestinal inflammation, as they are  resistant  to  enzymatic  degradation  [36].  The  level  of  α-  1antitrypsin in feces indicates protein loss within the intestinal lumen  and  serves  as  an  indirect  measure  of  mucosal  barrier integrity. Zonulin, which  regulates intestinal permeability by  modulating  tight  junction  function,  is  another  important marker of intestinal permeability in the feces [19]. We observed significantly  higher  levels  of  α-  1-  antitrypsin,  zonulin,  calprotectin, and lactoferrin in the feces of PD patients compared to HS. Additionally, levels of calprotectin and lactoferrin were positively correlated with α-  1-  antitrypsin and zonulin levels, aligning with previous studies that link intestinal inflammation to increased permeability [36, 37]. In summary, intestinal permeability is markedly elevated in PD patients, which may lead to adverse effects such as increased translocation of bacteria (e.g., E. coli ) [38] and bacterial products (e.g., lipopolysaccharides) [16] from the gut to the blood. This compromised intestinal permeability likely contributes to a pro-  inflammatory environment in the gut and increases oxidative stress on the ENS.

In  our  untargeted  metabolomics  analysis  of  plasma  and fecal  samples  from  PD  and  HS  groups,  we  identified  seven metabolites that are elevated in plasma but not in the stool. The elevations of these seven metabolites in plasma are positively  correlated  with  disruption  of  intestinal  permeability and  intestinal  inflammation  or  disease  severity.  Notably, 3-  Methoxytyrosine  (3-  MT),  previously  linked  to  PD  therapeutic  drugs,  was  excluded  from  further  analysis  to  avoid potential  confounding  effects  from  medication.  Our  results revealed  significantly  elevated  levels  of  N-  Acetyl-  L-  tyrosine (NALT) in the plasma of  PD  patients.  Previous  research  on

FIGURE 4 |    Spearman correlation analysis between differentially abundant plasma metabolites and clinical characteristics of Parkinson's disease, represented as a heatmap. The correlation matrix illustrates the strength and directionality of associations, where red denotes positive correlation coefficients and blue indicates negative correlation coefficients. Statistical significance levels are denoted as follows: * p &lt;  0.05, ** p &lt;  0.01, *** p &lt;  0.001.

uremia has classified NALT as a uremic toxin when present at high levels in serum or plasma [39, 40]. Uremic toxins are endogenous molecules that, when not properly cleared by the kidneys, can contribute to kidney damage, neurological deficits,  and  other  health  issues  [41].  Although  specific  studies on NALT in the plasma of PD patients are lacking, research on N-  terminal acetylated amino acids suggests that such substances might influence alpha-  synuclein aggregation, potentially accelerating PD progression [42, 43]. Moreover, a study of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of PD patients found elevated levels  of  N-  acetylated  amino  acids,  which  were  associated with excitotoxicity and oxidative stress in PD pathology [44].

TABLE 4 |    Analysis  of  the  significance  of  differential  metabolites between patients with constipation and those without constipation.

| Metabolite                                        |    p | FDR a   |
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-sulfate               | 0.02 | 0.03 a  |
| Propyl gallate                                    | 0    | 0.01 a  |
| NP-019988                                         | 0    | 0.01 a  |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl) carbamate | 0.04 | 0.06    |
| N-Acetyl-L-tyrosine                               | 0.09 | 0.11    |
| (+)-Vulgraon B                                    | 0.38 | 0.38    |

Note: Relationships between differential metabolites with constipated or not in PD compared by Wilcoxon rank sum test.

a FDR ≤ 0.05; Constipation ( n =  27), Non-  constipation ( n =  15).

Recent research has also highlighted the role of abnormal histone acetylation and transcriptional regulation changes in PD through western blot analysis [45, 46]. These findings suggest that the elevated plasma levels of NALT may play a significant role  in  the  pathogenesis  of  PD.  Additionally,  cellular  oxidative  stress  and  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS)  imbalance  are key markers of PD, with excessive ROS production linked to neurotoxicity [47, 48]. Recent studies have identified NALT as an endogenous stress response factor that, under stress conditions, can influence ROS release from mitochondria. While low levels of ROS can trigger cytoprotective responses, high levels can be harmful [49]. Thus, we hypothesize that elevated NALT in the plasma of PD patients may lead to excessive ROS release from mitochondria, contributing to neurotoxicity and exacerbating PD progression.

Propyl gallate (PG) is a polyphenol known for its antioxidant properties. Over the past decade, research has highlighted the potential  of  polyphenols  to  prevent  or  mitigate  neurodegenerative diseases in both in vivo and in vitro models [50, 51]. However, our study identified a significant increase in PG levels in the plasma of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. This elevation was positively correlated with disease severity, motor symptoms, and constipation, which seems inconsistent with previous research findings. Notably, there are no prior reports on plasma PG levels in PD patients for comparison. PG is a widely used antioxidant, yet its toxicological effects warrant further investigation [52]. Ham et al. [53] demonstrated that PG could induce male infertility in mice by causing mitochondrial dysfunction, disrupting calcium homeostasis, and inhibiting

TABLE 5 |    Correlations between differential metabolites and clinical characteristics in PD patients.

| Metabolite                                       | Feature            |   R a |    p |
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-sulfate              | Disease duration   |  0.3  | 0.04 |
| Propyl gallate                                   | Disease duration   |  0.33 | 0.02 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | Disease duration   |  0.32 | 0.03 |
| NP-019988                                        | Disease duration   |  0.41 | 0    |
| N-Acetyl-L-tyrosine                              | Madopar            |  0.37 | 0.01 |
| Propyl gallate                                   | MDS-UPDRS part III |  0.46 | 0.02 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | MDS-UPDRS part III |  0.57 | 0    |
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-sulfate              | HAMA               |  0.3  | 0.04 |
| Propyl gallate                                   | HAMA               |  0.31 | 0.03 |
| Propyl gallate                                   | H&Y stage          |  0.33 | 0.02 |
| NP-019988                                        | H&Y stage          |  0.32 | 0.03 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | NMSQ               |  0.33 | 0.03 |
| NP-019988                                        | PDQ-39             |  0.3  | 0.04 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | MDS-UPDRS part I   |  0.37 | 0.01 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | MDS-UPDRS part II  |  0.39 | 0.01 |
| NP-019988                                        | MDS-UPDRS part II  |  0.41 | 0    |

Abbreviations: H&amp;Y stage, Hoehn and Yahr stage; HAMA, Hamilton Anxiety Scale; MDS-  UPDRS, Movement Disorder Society-  sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale; NMSQ, Non-  Motor Symptoms Questionnaire; PDQ-  39, The 39-  item Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire. a

R : The Partial coefficient of correlation.

FIGURE 5 |    Diagnostic performance evaluation of plasma metabolite biomarkers using Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves for Parkinson's disease prediction. (A) Comparative ROC curve analysis of individual metabolites as standalone biomarkers. (B) ROC curve analysis of a multi-  metabolite prediction model incorporating 5 metabolites  (NP-  019988,  Ethyl  N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl)carbamate, 3,4-  Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-  sulfate,  Propyl  gallate,  and  N-  Acetyl-  Ltyrosine), achieving an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.94. (C) ROC curve analysis of a simplified two-  metabolite model (Propyl gallate and N-  Acetyl-  L-  tyrosine), demonstrating an AUC of 0.91.

genes crucial for testicular development. Additionally, PG has been shown to block trophoblast invasion by inducing mitochondrial dysfunction and cell apoptosis [54]. These findings suggest that PG-  induced mitochondrial dysfunction is a key pathway for its toxic effects [52]. Furthermore, PG has been reported to  exhibit  pro-  oxidant  effects,  causing  DNA  strand breaks  in  the  presence  of  Cu(II)  [55].  Depending  on  dosage and exposure duration, PG can impair the activity of superoxide  dismutase  and  catalase,  leading  to  increased  reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation [56]. As a common food additive, PG is metabolized by the liver and kidneys. Despite efforts to control dietary differences by selecting spouses who have lived with the patients for extended periods, some variability remains. We hypothesize that the impaired intestinal barrier in PD patients may lead to increased absorption of PG into  the  bloodstream,  where  it  accumulates  and  potentially exacerbates  PD  progression  by  inducing  mitochondrial  dysfunction and ROS accumulation. Further animal studies are needed to validate these mechanisms.

We also detected elevated levels of 3,4-  dihydroxyphenylglycol O-  sulfate in the plasma of PD patients, with significant positive correlations to constipation, disease duration, and HAMA scores.  Although  this  metabolite  is  found  in  various  foods, quantitative  reports  are  lacking.  Similar  to  PG,  we  suspect that  the  increase  in  3,4-  dihydroxyphenylglycol  O-  sulfate  is related  to  intestinal  barrier  impairment.  Capturing  these associations is just the initial step of our research, aimed at guiding  downstream  mechanistic  studies.  Additionally,  we observed  significant  increases  in  two  other  substancesEthyl  N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl)  carbamate  and  NP019988-in the plasma of PD patients, and these substances are not yet annotated in metabolite databases such as HMDB and  KEGG.  Ethyl  N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl)  carbamate  was  strongly  correlated  with  longer  disease  duration, more  severe  MDS-  UPDRS  motor  scores,  and  greater  nonmotor symptoms (NMSQ). While no direct information was retrieved regarding these specific compounds, our investigation  identified  that  Ethyl  N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl) carbamate  belongs  to  the  thiocarbamate  class-a  group  of compounds frequently employed as active ingredients in pesticides known to induce neurotoxicity through mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS generation [57]. In our study, this compound demonstrated significant elevation in the plasma of PD patients and showed a strong correlation with intestinal barrier impairment, leading us to postulate its potential involvement in PD pathogenesis. Similarly, no matching information was found in metabolic databases for NP-  019988. Nonyl phenol (NP), a well-  documented environmental endocrine disruptor widely used in industrial and agricultural applications, has established  neurotoxic  effects  [58].  The  precise  relationship between NP-  019988 and NP remains unclear. However, if a structural or functional association exists between these compounds, NP-  019988 may potentially enter systemic circulation through  dietary  exposure.  Our  study  revealed  significantly elevated NP-  019988 levels in PD patient plasma, showing notable positive correlations with constipation, disease duration, H-  Y stage, MDS-  UPDRS part II, and PDQ-  39 scores. Based on these clinical correlations and its co-  occurrence with intestinal barrier dysfunction, we hypothesize that NP-  019988 may translocate across the compromised gut barrier into circulation, thereby exerting neurotoxic effects. Although both compounds remain unannotated in current metabolic databases, our study demonstrates their significant elevation in plasma levels and strong association with intestinal barrier dysfunction.  Notably,  structural  analogs  of  these  substances  exhibit well-  documented neurotoxic properties. We therefore propose their potential involvement in established PD pathogenic pathways, such as mitochondrial dysfunction, ROS accumulation, and neuroinflammation. As database development progresses and further experiments are conducted, these metabolites will be annotated, potentially providing insights into their mechanisms of action.

The results from our metabolomics analysis provide valuable insights into potential biomarkers for Parkinson's disease (PD) and help uncover biologically plausible disease mechanisms such as excitotoxicity, neuroinflammation, and oxidative stress [59, 60]. With growing recognition of the role of gut microbial-  metabolite pathways in PD, fecal samples have become a common choice for assessing intestinal metabolite levels [12, 61]. However, these levels can be significantly influenced by external factors such as diet, mood, and environmental conditions, which may not fully reflect the disease itself. Interestingly, intestinal metabolites can be absorbed into the bloodstream through the intestinal epithelium and are maintained within physiological ranges through mass action-  driven  oxidation  [62].  As  a  result,  plasma  metabolites  are  generally  more  stable  and  less  affected  by  external

variables  compared  to  fecal  metabolites.  Additionally,  plasma sample collection is not restricted by constipation, making it a more reliable option for identifying PD biomarkers and understanding  the  underlying  mechanisms.  In  fact,  dietary  habits exert significant influence on both microbial composition and metabolite  outcomes,  necessitating  the  establishment  of  standardized  dietary  protocols  and  assessment  tools.  This  study fundamentally addresses dietary variability by selecting healthy spouses who shared long-  term dietary patterns with patients as the control group. Concurrently, we implemented the REAP-  S dietary assessment scale to objectively evaluate the dietary patterns of all participants.

In our study, we identified five metabolites, including 3,4-  dihydroxyphenylglycol  O-  sulfate,  Ethyl  N-  (1,4-  thiazinan4-  ylcarbothioyl) carbamate, N-  acetyl-  L-  tyrosine, propyl gallate, and NP-  019988, as potential biomarkers for PD. Notably, propyl gallate and N-  acetyl-  L-  tyrosine, which have been documented in  other  studies,  showed  high  predictive  potential  for  PD  occurrence, with an AUC value reaching 0.91. We speculate that these five substances likely enter the bloodstream through the

· Propyl gallate

Gut

FIGURE 6 |    The Potential Mechanism of Action of Differential Metabolites. Five metabolites (NP-  019988, Ethyl N-  (1,4-  thiazinan-  4-  ylcarbothioyl) carbamate, 3,4-  Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-  sulfate, Propyl gallate, and N-  Acetyl-  L-  tyrosine) accumulate in the blood through a compromised intestinal barrier. It is speculated that these substances further induce mitochondrial dysfunction, leading to the death of dopaminergic neurons.

IL -6

TNF

compromised intestinal barrier in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and accumulate therein. This accumulation may lead to mitochondrial dysfunction, which in turn triggers an increase in reactive oxygen species (ROS). The elevated levels of ROS can further induce neurotoxicity, ultimately affecting the neurological functions of PD patients and playing a significant role in the progression of the disease. This process may elucidate the potential link between these substances and the pathophysiology of PD, providing new directions for future research and treatment (Figure 6). Previous studies have highlighted short-  chain fatty acids (SCFAs) as key biomarkers in PD, given their role in the microbiota-  gut-  brain axis, gut barrier integrity, and gastrointestinal motility [12, 17, 63]. Recent research noted a discrepancy where SCFAs were low in stool but high in plasma, potentially related  to  increased  intestinal  permeability  [18,  19].  This  suggests that when a substance is present in stool without a significant difference between PD and healthy controls but shows a notable difference in plasma, it could indicate passage through a compromised intestinal barrier into the bloodstream. However, the  source  and  destination  of  fecal  metabolites  are  relatively complex, and the low levels of metabolites in stool may be due to

either their less production or excessive degradation by gut microorganisms, while it is insufficient evidence to suggest that its low concentration is due to the increase of absorption into blood caused  by  intestinal  barrier  dysfunction.  So,  we  propose  that when a substance exists in the stool of PD and HS without difference, but there is a significant difference in plasma based on the damaged intestinal barrier, this difference provides stronger evidence for its passage through the damaged barrier into the bloodstream.

While  our  predictive  model  demonstrated  excellent  discriminative  performance  (AUC  0.94)  in  the  discovery  cohort,  several limitations should be acknowledged: (1) This study did not conduct independent cohort validation. While we implemented rigorous internal validation to ensure model robustness, the absence of an external validation cohort means that we are unable to fully assess the model's applicability across different populations. Future research needs to verify the model's performance through multicenter,  large-  scale  prospective  studies  to  ensure its stability and reliability in diverse settings. (2) We initially accounted for dietary variations by including spouses as controls, but overlooked the fact that long-  term cohabitation leads to similarities in metabolites due to shared dietary and environmental exposures.  Therefore,  incorporating  healthy  individuals  from outside the household as an additional control group is essential for subsequent studies. (3) Most patients were already on medication, and we did not include a cohort of newly diagnosed patients who had not yet received treatment to assess the impact of  medication  effects.  Including  drug-  naive  newly  diagnosed patients  and  stratifying  long-  term  medicated  patients  by  type of  medication would more directly demonstrate the impact of medications on metabolites. (4) As a cross-  sectional study, this study limited our observation of the dynamic changes of these metabolites.

## 5   |   Conclusion

This  study  is  the  first  to  employ  untargeted  metabolomics  to identify metabolites that exhibited no significant differences in stool samples between PD patients and HS but were significantly elevated in the plasma of PD patients. Our findings identified significant  metabolite  alterations  in  PD  patients  and  revealed their associations with intestinal barrier dysfunction and clinical characteristics of the disease. Moving forward, we plan to follow up with these patients to record their dietary habits and establish longitudinal cohorts, allowing for a more comprehensive understanding of the changes in metabolites as the disease progresses.

## Author Contributions

Puqing Wang, Jing Tian, Sufang Liu conceived the project. Qiang Zhao performed  the  analyses.  Xianhong  Li,  Jie  Tang,  Juan  Wang,  Yuting Zhao,  Zhengting  Yang,  Xin  Pan,  and  Rui  Xiang  collected  samples. Sufang Liu and Puqing Wang wrote the manuscript.

## Acknowledgments

Thanks to the government, the hospital, the clinical research center, and all participants support.

## Ethics Statement

This study received approval from the Ethical Committee of Biomedical Basic Research of Xiangyang No. 1 People's Hospital (XYYYE20230027), and written informed consent was obtained from all participants.

## Conflicts of Interest

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Data Availability Statement

The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.

## Table 1

| 0                        | 1             | 2          |     3 |
|:-------------------------|:--------------|:-----------|------:|
| Age, years               | 67.30±6.13    | 66.78±7.50 | 0.705 |
| Sex, male ( n , %)       | 31 (62.0)     | 30 (60.0)  | 0.838 |
| Height (cm)              | 1.65±0.06     | 1.626±0.06 | 0.083 |
| Weight (Kg)              | 63.43±8.62    | 62.46±8.56 | 0.574 |
| BMI (kg/m 2 )            | 23.40±3.05    | 23.64±3.20 | 0.701 |
| REAP-S (mean)            | 32.56±2.71    | 32.26±2.47 | 0.565 |
| Disease duration (y)     | 6.45±4.02     | NA         |       |
| LEDD (mg)                | 583.45±402.44 | NA         |       |
| MDS-UPDRS Part I score   | 12.68±6.61    | NA         |       |
| MDS-UPDRS Part II score  | 16.98±9.58    | NA         |       |
| MDS-UPDRS Part III score | 46.83±17.06   | NA         |       |
| HAMAscore                | 7.88±7.27     | NA         |       |
| HAMDscore                | 9.00±6.64     | NA         |       |
| MoCA score               | 19.92±6.13    | NA         |       |
| ROMA-III, Y( n , %)      | 32 (64.0)     | NA         |       |
| Hyposmia rating scale    | 17.35±8.36    | NA         |       |
| H&Y stage                | 2.61±0.91     | NA         |       |
| RBDSQ                    | 4.34±3.33     | NA         |       |
| NMSQscore                | 12.68±5.24    | NA         |       |
| PDQ-39                   | 41.40±22.85   | NA         |       |

## Table 2

| 0                                                  |        1 |        2 |
|:---------------------------------------------------|---------:|---------:|
| 3-Methoxytyrosine                                  | 1.16e-20 | 7.05e-20 |
| Tropinone                                          | 9.32e-05 | 0        |
| N-Acetyl-L-tyrosine                                | 1.89e-05 | 0        |
| Propyl gallate                                     | 2.17e-18 | 1.99e-16 |
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-sulfate                | 4.97e-19 | 6.08e-17 |
| 1 (3H)-Isobenzofuranone, 3-butylidene-             | 0        | 0.02     |
| 2-Amino-9-(6-aminopurin-9-yl)-1H- purin-6-one      | 0        | 0        |
| NP-019988                                          | 1.55e-21 | 4.69e-19 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4- ylcarbothioyl) carbamate | 6.1e-09  | 6.16e-07 |
| (+)-Vulgraon B                                     | 8.81e-05 | 0        |

## Table 3

| 0                         | 1               |    2 |    3 |
|:--------------------------|:----------------|-----:|-----:|
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol | Calprotectin    | 0.43 | 0    |
| O-sulfate                 | Lactoferrin     | 0.49 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         | 0.4  | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin | 0.42 | 0    |
| Propyl gallate            | Calprotectin    | 0.48 | 0    |
|                           | Lactoferrin     | 0.53 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         | 0.47 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin | 0.46 | 0    |
| (+)-Vulgraon B            | Calprotectin    | 0.39 | 0    |
|                           | Lactoferrin     | 0.34 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         | 0.34 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin | 0.36 | 0    |
| 3-Methoxytyrosine         | Calprotectin    | 0.53 | 0    |
|                           | Lactoferrin     | 0.56 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         | 0.48 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin | 0.5  | 0    |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4- | Calprotectin    | 0.41 | 0    |
| ylcarbothioyl) carbamate  | Lactoferrin     | 0.44 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         | 0.36 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin | 0.41 | 0    |
| N-Acetyl-L-tyrosine       | Calprotectin    | 0.27 | 0.02 |
|                           | Lactoferrin     | 0.27 | 0.02 |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin | 0.3  | 0.01 |
| NP-019988                 | Calprotectin    | 0.51 | 0    |
|                           | Lactoferrin     | 0.52 | 0    |
|                           | Zonulin         | 0.46 | 0    |
|                           | ɑ-1-antitrypsin | 0.48 | 0    |

## Table 4

| 0                                                 |    1 | 2      |
|:--------------------------------------------------|-----:|:-------|
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-sulfate               | 0.02 | 0.03 a |
| Propyl gallate                                    | 0    | 0.01 a |
| NP-019988                                         | 0    | 0.01 a |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl) carbamate | 0.04 | 0.06   |
| N-Acetyl-L-tyrosine                               | 0.09 | 0.11   |
| (+)-Vulgraon B                                    | 0.38 | 0.38   |

## Table 5

| 0                                                | 1                  |    2 |    3 |
|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------------|-----:|-----:|
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-sulfate              | Disease duration   | 0.3  | 0.04 |
| Propyl gallate                                   | Disease duration   | 0.33 | 0.02 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | Disease duration   | 0.32 | 0.03 |
| NP-019988                                        | Disease duration   | 0.41 | 0    |
| N-Acetyl-L-tyrosine                              | Madopar            | 0.37 | 0.01 |
| Propyl gallate                                   | MDS-UPDRS part III | 0.46 | 0.02 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | MDS-UPDRS part III | 0.57 | 0    |
| 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol O-sulfate              | HAMA               | 0.3  | 0.04 |
| Propyl gallate                                   | HAMA               | 0.31 | 0.03 |
| Propyl gallate                                   | H&Y stage          | 0.33 | 0.02 |
| NP-019988                                        | H&Y stage          | 0.32 | 0.03 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | NMSQ               | 0.33 | 0.03 |
| NP-019988                                        | PDQ-39             | 0.3  | 0.04 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | MDS-UPDRS part I   | 0.37 | 0.01 |
| Ethyl N-(1,4-thiazinan-4-ylcarbothioyl)carbamate | MDS-UPDRS part II  | 0.39 | 0.01 |
| NP-019988                                        | MDS-UPDRS part II  | 0.41 | 0    |