## Effect of Probiotics Supplementation on REM Sleep Behavior Disorder and Motor Symptoms in Parkinson's Disease: A Pilot Study

Yitong Du 1   |  Lin Wang 1 |  Ying Cui 1 |  Xiaojiao Xu 2 |  Mingkai Zhang 1   |  Yue Li 3 |  Ting Gao 4 |  Dan Gao 5   |  Zhi Sheng 6 | Shiya Wang 1   |  Houzhen Tuo 1

1 Department of Neurology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China  | 2 Department of Neurology, The First Medical Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China  | 3 Nanfang Hospital Baiyun Branch, Guangdong, China  | 4 Editorial Department, Chinese Medical Journal, Chinese Medical Association Publishing House, Beijing, China  | 5 Beijing Renhe Hospital, Beijing, China  | 6 Shijingshan Teaching Hospital of Capital Medical University, Beijing Shijingshan Hospital, Beijing, China

Correspondence: Houzhen Tuo (tuohouzhen@ccmu.edu.cn)

Received: 19 March 2025  | Revised: 8 July 2025  | Accepted: 21 July 2025

Funding: This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 82071257 and 82371254).

Keywords: gut microbiota | motor symptoms | Parkinson's disease | probiotics | REM sleep behavior disorder

## ABSTRACT

Background: Parkinson's disease (PD) patients experience gut microbiota dysbiosis. Probiotic intervention could potentially serve as a safe and effective adjunctive therapeutic approach for PD, but its effects on rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) and motor symptoms in PD patients warrant further investigation.

Objectives: To examine the influence of probiotics on RBD, motor symptoms, gut microbiota, and serum metabolites in individuals with PD.

Methods: In this randomized controlled trial, PD patients were randomly allocated to either a probiotics or a control group while maintaining standard treatments. Clinical outcomes, including Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) and RBD Questionnaire-  Hong Kong (RBDQ-  HK) were assessed at baseline and post-  treatment. Furthermore, fecal and blood samples were collected from PD patients at both timepoints, with additional samples obtained from healthy controls for comparison. The 16S rRNA gene V3-  V4 region sequencing method was used to analyze gut microbiota composition, and untargeted metabolomic techniques were utilized to assess serum metabolite alterations, followed by correlation analysis.

Results: Fifty eligible PD patients were enrolled and randomly allocated into two groups. After 12 weeks of intervention, the probiotic group showed significant reductions in both UPDRS total scores ( -4.8 ± 7.5 vs. 1.8 ± 13.1, p =  0.009) and RBDQ-  HK scores ( -7.5 ± 6.5 vs. 0 ± 5.8, p =  0.015) compared to controls. Gut microbiota analysis revealed increased abundance of Actinobacteria , Negativicutes ,  and Bacillus ,  with  reductions  in Lactococcus , Comamonas ,  and Enterococcus after  probiotic  intervention. Furthermore, compared to normal controls, PD patients exhibited 9 significantly elevated and 11 significantly reduced metabolites; probiotic intervention altered the serum metabolome in PD patients.

Conclusions: This study demonstrated probiotics' potential to ameliorate RBD and motor symptoms while positively affecting the composition of the gut microbiota and serum metabolites in PD patients.

Yitong Du and Lin Wang authors have contributed equally to this work and share first authorship.

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

© 2025 The Author(s). CNS Neuroscience &amp; Therapeutics published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.

## 1   |   Introduction

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a high disability rate, with clinical symptoms encompassing both motor and non-  motor symptoms [1]. Current treatment  for  PD,  such  as  levodopa,  dopamine  agonists,  and monoamine  oxidase  B  inhibitors,  can  only  partially  control motor symptoms but does not prevent dopaminergic neuron degeneration [2]. As the disease progresses, patients may develop motor complications such as the 'on-off' phenomenon, end-  ofdose  wearing-  off,  and  dyskinesia  that  increase  the  burden  on patients' families and society.

Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is present  in  40%-69%  of  PD  and  is  considered  one  of  the  most promising  prodromal  PD  markers.  RBD  is  characterized  by dream-  related  complex  motor  behaviors  and  loss  of  normal skeletal  muscle  atonia  during  REM  sleep  [3,  4].  Current  PD medications fail to improve RBD symptoms, and some drugs even exacerbate the frequency of RBD episodes frequency [5]. Although clonazepam is recommended for the management of RBD, its long-  term use may lead to side effects, including cognitive decline.

In  recent  years,  studies  have  highlighted  the  microbiota-  gutbrain axis's crucial role in PD pathogenesis and have put forth the intestinal origin hypothesis [6-8]. Some evidence suggests gut dysbiosis in PD patients; aberrant aggregation and impaired clearance  of  α-  synuclein  in  the  enteric  nervous  system  (ENS) may  be  associated  with  intestinal  flora  [9-11].  Consequently, modulating gut microbiota composition has emerged as a novel therapeutic strategy [12]. Probiotics can maintain intestinal epithelial integrity, protect the intestinal barrier, regulate gastrointestinal immunity, and inhibit pathogenic bacteria [13]. Recent research has demonstrated that probiotics not only contribute significantly to the prevention and treatment of various gastrointestinal diseases [14], but also benefit conditions like diabetes, malignancies,  cardiovascular  disorders,  and  central  nervous system  disease,  including  Alzheimer's  disease  (AD),  depression, PD, epilepsy, and other diseases [15-18]. This investigation aimed to evaluate the impact of probiotics supplementation on motor  symptoms  and  RBD  in  PD  patients,  and  to  investigate probiotics-  induced  changes  in  gut  microbiota  and  serum  metabolites  using  16S  rRNA  gene  sequencing  and  metabolomics analysis.

## 2   |   Methods

## 2.1   |   Study Design and Participants

This 12-  week, open-  label, randomized controlled trial was approved by the Ethics Review Committee of Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University (No. 2018-  P2-  080-  01). All participants provided informed consent, and all measurements and questionnaires were voluntary. The trial was registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR2200065638).

We  recruited  idiopathic  PD  patients  from  December  2017 to  December  2020.  Inclusion  criteria:  (1)  Idiopathic  PD  patients,  meeting  the  2015  Movement  Disorder  Society  (MDS)

clinical diagnostic criteria; (2) Aged 40-80 years; (3) Modified Hoehn and Yahr stages 1-3, with stable motor symptoms for ≥ 1  month  before  enrollment;  (4)  No  changes  to  PD  medications in the 4 weeks preceding enrollment; (5) Understand and agree with this clinical trial. Exclusion criteria were: (1) Use of probiotics, prebiotics, or antibiotics within 8 weeks before enrollment; (2) History of gastrointestinal tumors, inflammatory bowel disease, or gastrointestinal surgery; (3) Severe cardiovascular,  hepatic,  or  renal  dysfunction,  or  otherwise  unable to  cooperate  with  the  study;  (4)  Known  allergy  to  the  study probiotics.

Thirty  sex-  and  age-  matched  healthy  controls  were  recruited. Inclusion criteria: Aged 40-80 years; no neurological disorders. Exclusion criteria matched those of PD subjects.

## 2.2   |   Intervention

All participants were randomly assigned to either the probiotics group or the control group. Both groups maintained their original treatment regimens unchanged, while the probiotics group additionally received 2 capsules of Bacillus licheniformis three times a day and 4 capsules of BIFICO twice a day for 12 weeks. Participants  were  instructed  to  maintain  their  habitual  diets throughout  the  study.  Each  patient  was  followed  up  face-  toface  every  month  to  assess  protocol  adherence  and  document adverse events.

## 2.3   |   Probiotics Formulation

The probiotics mixture used in this study contained four bacterial species, Bacillus licheniformis (2.5 × 10 9   CFU/capsule, Dongbei  Pharmaceutical  Group  Company,  Shenyang  No.  1 Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., China), Bifidobacterium  longum , Lactobacillus acidophilus , and Enterococcus faecalis (each 1.0 × 10 7   CFU/capsule, Shanghai Sine Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., China).

## 2.4   |   Assessment of Outcomes

The  primary  outcome  was  the  Unified  Parkinson's  Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS)  total score. The secondary outcome  measurements  included  REM  sleep  behavior  disorder  questionnaire-  Hong  Kong  (RBDQ-  HK)  scores,  levodopa equivalent daily dosage (LEDD), alteration of gut microbiota, and serum metabolites.

## 2.5   |   Clinical Assessments

Demographic data, disease duration, and detailed medical history,  including  medications,  were  collected.  Using  Modified H&amp;Y to assess the stage of the disease.

All outcome assessments were conducted at baseline and week 12. Using the RBD screening questionnaire (RBD-  SQ) for preliminary screening of RBD symptoms [19], patients whose RBD-  SQ score is ≥ 6 points will be further evaluated with the RBD-  HK scale [20].

## 2.6   |   Fecal Sample Collection

Participants  were  instructed  to  collect  fecal  samples  at  baseline and week 12 using fecal collection containers provided by Allwegene Company (Beijing). All samples were stored at-  80°C until processing.

## 2.7   |   Blood Sample Collection

For each subject, a 3 mL fasting blood sample was collected at both baseline and 12 weeks, with all blood draws conducted between 8:00 AM and 12:00 PM. The samples were anticoagulated with heparin and centrifuged at 1800 rpm for 15 min, then the separated plasma specimens were stored in a -80°C freezer.

## 2.8   |   DNA Extraction and 16S rRNA Gene Sequencing

Fecal  genomic  DNA  was  extracted  according  to  previous descriptions  [21].  The  V3-  V4  hypervariable  regions  of  bacterial  16S  rRNA  gene  were  amplified  with  universal  primers  338F  (5′-  ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-  3′)  and  806R (5′-  GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-  3′). Paired-  end sequencing  was  conducted  on  the  Illumina  MiSeq  PE300 high-  throughput  sequencing  platform  (Allwegene  Company, Beijing, China).

## 2.9   |   Metabolomic Analysis

Serum metabolite extraction and analysis were assisted by the Beijing  Allwegene  Company.  For  each  sample,  50 μL  was  aliquoted  into  an  EP  tube.  Subsequently,  200 μL  of  extraction solution  (acetonitrile:  methanol = 1:  1,  containing  isotopically labeled internal standard mixture) was added. After vortexing for 30 s, samples were sonicated for 10 min in an ice-  water bath and incubated for 1 h at -40°C to precipitate proteins. Then the samples were centrifuged at 12 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. The resulting  supernatant was transferred to a fresh glass vial for LC/MS analysis. The quality  control  sample  was  prepared  by mixing equal aliquots of the supernatants from all of the samples.  In  this  study,  71  samples  were  included  for  non-  targeted metabolomics analysis: Normal controls (15 samples), Control group (26 samples), and Probiotics group (30 samples).

## 2.10   |   Statistical Analysis

SPSS 21.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for the statistical analysis. Normality of variables (age, Hoehn-  Yahr stage, UPDRS, UPDRS-  III, RBD-  HK, and LEDD) was assessed using Shapiro-Wilk  tests.  The  results  demonstrated  that  age  and UPDRS  scores  in  both  groups  followed  normal  distribution, whereas  Hoehn-  Yahr  stage,  UPDRS-  III  scores,  and  LEDD  in the control group did not conform to the normal distribution. For comparison of normally and non-  normally distributed continuous  data,  paired  t-  test  (age,  UPDRS)  or  Wilcoxon  signed rank  test  (Hoehn-  Yahr  stage,  UPDRS-  III  scores,  and  LEDD)

were used for within-  group differences, t-  test (age, UPDRS) and Mann-Whitney U test  (Hoehn-  Yahr  stage,  UPDRS-  III  scores, and  LEDD)  were  used  respectively  for  between-  group  differences.  Categorical  variables  were  expressed  as  a  composition ratio, using the Chi-  square test for between-  group comparisons. Spearman's rank-  order correlation analysis was used to assess non-  parametric  associations  between  variables.  Two-  sided P values &lt; 0.05 were considered to indicate statistical significance.

For  bioinformatic  analysis,  raw  sequencing  data  were  demultiplexed  using  QIIME1  (v1.8.0)  based  on  barcode  sequences, and  the  data  were  filtered  and  spliced  using  PEAR  (v0.9.6). Sequences shorter than 230 bp were removed, and the UCHIME method  was  used  according  to  the  Gold  Database  to  remove the  chimeric  sequences.  Qualified  reads  were  clustered  into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at 97% similarity using the UPARSE  algorithm  of  VSEARCH  (v2.7.1)  software  [22].  The Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) Classifier tool was used to classify  all  sequences  into  different  taxonomic  groups  against the SILVA128 database [23].

Then  alpha  and  beta  diversity  indices  were  calculated  using Quantitative  Insights  Into  Microbial  Ecology  (QIIME)  [24]. Principal  coordinates  analysis  (PCoA)  was  performed  in  R (v3.6.0)  software  based  on  Weighted  Unifrace  distances  [25]. The metastats intergroup heterogeneity analysis was performed using Mothur (v.1.34.4) software, and LEfSe analysis was performed  using  Python  (v2.7)  software  (LDA  score  &gt; 3.0  and p &lt;  0.05)  [26].  Microbiota  functional  potential  was  predicted using PICRUSt 2.

MetaboAnalyst  3.0  was  used  to  analyze  metabolomics  data, including  principal  component  analysis  (PCA)  and  orthogonal  partial  least  squares  discrimination  analysis  (OPLS-  DA). Metabolites with Variable Importance in the Projection (VIP) &gt; 1 and p &lt;  0.05 (student's t test) were considered statistically significant. The KEGG database was used for metabolic pathway analysis of differential metabolites.

## 3   |   Results

We initially screened 60 patients, of whom 50 met the inclusion criteria  without meeting any exclusion criteria. All 50 participants  were  randomly  allocated  to  either  the  probiotics  group ( n =  25) or the control group ( n =  25). Two patients (one per group) withdrew from the study for personal reasons (Figure 1). All 50 cases were ultimately included in the analysis by intention-  totreat (ITT) analysis. In addition, samples from normal controls were retained for subsequent studies.

General  characteristics,  PD  severity,  and  medications  showed no statistically significant differences between groups (Table 1).

## 3.1   |   Effect of Probiotics on RBD in PD Patients

The probiotics group included 21 cases with RBD, compared to 17 in the control group. At baseline, there was no statistically significant difference in RBD-  HK scores between the two groups. After  12 weeks  of  treatment,  the  probiotics  group  showed  an

Patients with PD (n=60)

Randomized (n=50)

Allocated to intervention (n=25)

Lost to follow-up (n=1)

Stool sample collected (n=22)

Normal control (n=30)

Serum sample collected (n=15)

FIGURE 1 |    Study flow diagram.

average decrease of 7.5 points in the RBD-  HK score, whereas the control group showed no significant change ( -7.5 ± 6.5 vs. 0.0 ± 5.8, p =  0.015,  Table 1). A reduction of &gt; 30% in RBD-  HK scores  was  considered  symptomatic  improvement.  Eight  patients in the probiotics group achieved this threshold, compared to  only  one  in  the  control  group.  Consequently,  the  probiotics group showed a significantly higher improvement rate for RBD (38.1% vs. 5.9%, X 2 =  5.39, p =  0.02;  Table 1). These results suggest that probiotics treatment could alleviate RBD symptoms in PD patients.

## 3.2   |   Effects of Probiotics on Motor Symptoms in PD Patients

Compared to baseline, UPDRS scores decreased significantly in  the  probiotics  group  but  increased  slightly  in  the  control group  ( -5.2 ± 8.5  vs.  1.8 ± 13.1, p =  0.028).  Additionally,  the LEDD decreased in the probiotics group after probiotics supplementation(351.5 ± 194.6  vs.  330.0 ± 183.7, p =  0.048),  with a  greater  reduction  trend  compared  with  the  control  group (Table  1).  These  results  indicated  that  adjunctive  probiotics  therapy  may  enhance  motor  symptoms  and  reduce  the levodopa equivalent dosage in PD patients compared to conventional treatment alone.

## 3.3   |   Effects of Probiotics on Gut Microbiota in PD Patients

Forty-  two participants (probiotics group: n =  22; control group: n =  20)  provided fecal samples meeting analytical standards at both baseline and post-  treatment. All participants maintained stable dietary habits during the treatment. Additionally, 30 normal controls provided stool samples.

To evaluate probiotics effects  on  the  microbiota  community  abundance,  alpha  diversities  were  analyzed  as  shown  in Figure 2A [22]. No significant change occurred in alpha diversity indices (Chao 1, observed-  species, Shannon, or PD-  wholetree)  after  probiotics  consumption.  Beta  diversity  was  further assessed with NMDS (Figure 2B). ANOSIM showed no statistical difference between the probiotics (P) and after probiotics treatment (AP) groups ( R = -0.02, p =  0.759), indicating that probiotics do not cause drastic changes in the gut microbiota of PD patients. The p\_Actinobacteriota and c\_Negativicutes abundance increased significantly after probiotics treatment at the phylum and class level (Figure 2C). At the genus level, the abundance of Gordonibacter and Peptoniphilus coxii was significantly higher after probiotics treatment, while the abundance of Lactococcus , Comamonas , and Enterococcus significantly decreased (Figure  2D).  At  the  species  level,  the  abundance  of Bacillus sp.\_SB47, Streptococcus\_mutans\_U2B, and Lactobacillus\_casei increased, while the abundance of Enterococcus \_ faecium , Comamonas\_kerstersii , and Ruminococcaceae\_bacterium GD-  1 decreased  (all p &lt;  0.05;  Figure  2D).  The  LDA  identified Actinobacteria and Negativicutes as post-  intervention biomarker bacteria in PD patients (Figure 2E).

Meanwhile,  we  conducted  a  comparison  of  the  gut  microbiota  differences  between  PD  patients  ( n =  42)  and  normal controls  ( n =  30).  Shannon  ( p =  0.038)  and  Simpson  indices ( p =  0.017)  show  significantly  higher  microbial  diversity  in PD patients (Figure 3A). Beta diversity was further assessed with PCoA (Figure 3B). ANOSIM analysis showed marginally greater intergroup (PD vs. control) than intragroup variation, but  the  difference  was  not  statistically  significant  ( R =  0.04, p =  0.084).  We  used  LEfSe  to  identify  bacteria  showing  significant differential abundance between groups (Figure 3C). g\_Alloprevotella , s\_Haemophilus\_parainfluenzae , and Bacteroidota were identified as biomarkers in the NC group, whereas p\_Firmicutes , c\_Clostridia ,  and p\_Actinobacteriota among 30 taxa were identified as biomarkers in the PD group. We  further  utilized  PICRUSt  2  to  predict  microbiota  functions,  identifying  21  KEGG  pathways  that  differed  significantly between the two groups (level 3; Figure 3D). The PD group exhibited significant enrichment in 15 metabolic pathways, including Synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies, Biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, Dioxin degradation, Pyruvate metabolism, Butanoate metabolism, Glycolysis/ Gluconeogenesis, and Tryptophan metabolism in comparison to the control group.

TABLE 1 |    Baseline characteristics and intragroup versus intergroup comparisons of clinical parameters.

| p -value (between groups)     | 0.48 a      | 0.08 b       | 0.98 c       | 0.22 b          | 0.14 c    | 0.009 f   | 0.004 f            | 0.015 f   |          | 0.02 b          |
| p -value                      | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | 0.34 d    | 0.012 e            | 1 d       |          | -               |
| =25) Change                   | -           | -            | -            | -               |           | 1.8±13.1  | 0 (0, 50)          | 0±5.8     |          | -               |
| Control group End-of-trail    | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | 29.7±14.4 | 325 (187.5, 512.5) | 30.6±11.1 |          | 1               |
| Baseline                      | 64.8±8.7    | 48.0         | 2 (1.5, 2.5) | 23 (92)         | 17.7±10.8 | 27.9±14.7 | 325 (162.5,        | 30.6±11.3 | ( n =17) | 0               |
| p -value                      | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | 0.004 d   | 0.048 d            | <0.001 d  |          | -               |
| ( n =25) Change               | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | - 4.8±7.5 | - 21.5±50.4        | - 7.5±6.5 |          | -               |
| Probiotics group End-of-trail | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | 26.4±11.2 | 330.0±183.7        | 28.4±12.2 |          | 8               |
| Baseline                      | 66.7±9.1    | 72.0         | 2 (2, 2.5)   | 20 (80)         | 20.4±7.8  | 31.2±9.9  | 351.5±194.6        | 35.9±11.9 | ( n =21) | 0               |
|                               | Age (years) | Males, n (%) | Modified H&Y | Levodopa, n (%) | UPDRS-III | UPDRS     | LEDD (mg/day)      | RBD-HK    |          | RBD improvement |

Scale-  III.

-  test.

-  values obtained from unpaired

-  values obtained from Chi-  square test.

-  values obtained from Mann-Whitney U test.

-  values obtained from paired

-  values obtained from Wilcoxon Signed rank test.

f p -  values obtained from the time × group interaction.

PD\_whole\_tree

1000- observed\_species

FIGURE 2 |    Changes in gut microbiota after probiotics treatment. (A) Alpha diversity indices (Chao 1, observed\_species, PD\_whole\_tree, and Shannon) show diversity and evenness of gut microbiota. (B) Beta diversity analysis (between-  sample microbial community differences) visualized via Non-  metric Multidimensional Scaling (NMDS). (C) The microorganisms with significant differences between group P and group AP at the phylum and class levels. (D) Heat maps show differences at the genus and species levels. (E) LEfSe revealed statistically significant shifts in gut microbiota following probiotic intervention. AP, After intervention of probiotic group; AC, After observation of control group; C, Control group; NC, Normal control group; P, Probiotic group. * p &lt;  0.05.

## 3.4   |   Serum Metabolites Change in PD

A  total  of  28  PD  patients  (probiotics  group: n =  15;  control group: n =  13)  and  15  normal control people provided serum samples. PD patients who provided serum samples showed no significant differences in general characteristics, PD severity, or LEDD compared to all 50 PD patients (Table S1). We previously showed that PD patients exhibit a different gut microbiota composition compared to normal controls. To gain deeper insights, we investigated the variations in serum metabolites between them. PCA and OPLS-  DA can observe differences in metabolites between the two groups (Figure 4A,B). To identify differentially  metabolites  between  groups,  we  screened  for metabolites with a combination of VIP values &gt; 1 and p -  values &lt; 0.05 using OPLS-  DA analysis. Figure 4C shows the top 20 differential  metabolites  ranked  by  VIP  scores.  Compared  to the normal control group, 9 differential metabolites, such as 7-  methyluric  acid,  Costunolide,  and  alpha-  santonin  in  the PD  group  were  significantly  increased,  while  11  differential  metabolites,  such  as  1-  Deoxynojirimycin,  Harmaline, Dicyclomine, Asulam, Uridine, and Thiacloprid were significantly  decreased  (Figure  4C).  Notably,  theophylline  levels were  significantly  lower  in  PD  patients  despite  not  ranking among the top 20 metabolites. To elucidate the biological functions  of  serum  differential  metabolites,  we  conducted  metabolic  pathway enrichment analysis. The top 20 significantly altered metabolic pathways are displayed in Figure 4D.

## 3.5   |   Probiotics Intervention Alters Serum Metabolites in PD Patients

After  probiotics  intervention,  some  intestinal  bacteria  in  PD patients  showed  significant  changes.  Microbial  metabolites may act as primary mediators in regulating the microbiota-  gutbrain  axis:  after  intestinal  absorption,  these  metabolites  enter systemic circulation and ultimately reach the brain to exert biological  effects.  To  test  this  hypothesis,  serum  metabolites  in the probiotics treatment and control groups were sequenced by untargeted metabolomics. PCA analysis showed that the serum metabolites of PD patients were different after probiotics intervention  (Figure  5A).  We  found  that  up-  regulated  metabolites after  probiotics  intervention  were  Octanoylcarnitine,  8Z,14Zeicosadienoic  acid, Diflubenzuron,  (6e)-  8-  methyl-  6-  nonenoic acid,  while  down-  regulated  metabolites  included  Tazarotenic acid, DL-  arginine, N-  acetyl-  l-  glutamate, Daunorubicin, ess=0.2097

NC

Synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies

Protien processing in endoplasmic reticulum

Biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids

FIGURE 3 |    Alteration of gut microbiota in PD. (A) Alpha diversity indices (Shannon and Simpson) show changes in the diversity of the gut microbiota in PD patients compared to normal controls. (B) Beta diversity analysis (between-  sample microbial community differences) visualized via Principal component analysis (PCoA). (C) LEfSe analysis identified the microbes whose abundances significantly differed between the PD and NC groups. (D) 21 KEGG level 3 pathways significantly differed between the PD and NC groups. NC, Normal control group; PD, PD group. * p &lt;  0.05.

Indole-  3-  butyric  acid,  and  Maltose  (Figure  5B).  K-  means  cluster analysis showed that the levels of 19 metabolites (including Theophylline, Urushiol I, and Lauroyl-  l-  carnitine)  exhibited  a directional shift toward those observed in normal controls following probiotics administration (Figure 5C, Table S2). KEGG enrichment analysis of differential metabolites highlighted nine significantly  altered  pathways  ( p &lt;  0.05):  Arginine  biosynthesis, Carbohydrate digestion and absorption, Taste transduction, Starch  and  sucrose  metabolism,  D-  Amino  acid  metabolism, Biosynthesis of amino acids, 2-  Oxocarboxylic acid metabolism, ABC transporters, and Metabolic pathways (Figure 5D).

## 3.6   |   Association Between Clinical Scores, Intestinal Flora, and Serum Metabolites in PD Patients

Multivariate  correlation  analyses  were  conducted  to  explore the  relationship  between  gut  flora  and  serum  metabolites, which were significantly different after probiotics intervention, and clinical  measures (UPDRS, UPDRS-  III, RBD-  HK, LEDD, H-  Y)  in  PD patients. Our results showed that Romboutsia and Fusicatenibacter exhibited  positive  correlations  with  Asulam,

Thiacloprid, and others. In contrast, Butyricoccus was negatively correlated with 7-  methyluronic acid, N-  3-  hydroxyoctanoyll-  homoserine  lactone,  and  Mevalonic  acid  5-  pyrophosphate (Figure  6A).  Mevalonic  acid  5-  pyrophosphate  was  positively correlated with UPDRS (Figure 6B). Butyricoccus was negatively correlated  with  UPDRS,  UPDRS-  III,  and  H-  Y.  Additionally, Streptococcus salivarius and Blautia were also found to be negatively correlated with H-  Y (Figure 6C).

## 4   |   Discussion

A hallmark pathological feature of PD is the misfolding and abnormal aggregation of α-  syn, which results in the demise of dopaminergic neurons. Braak first hypothesized that α-  syn could be transmitted to the midbrain via the gastrointestinal vagus nerve [27, 28]. Supporting this, Kim et al. [29] injected pathological α-  syn into the gastrointestinal muscles of healthy mice. Seven months later, the injected α-  syn was detected in the striatum, and the mice showed dopamine system impairment. In 2014, the first study analyzing gut microbiota composition via 16S rRNA sequencing in 72 PD patients and matched healthy  controls  revealed  significant  microbial  community

1-(3,4-dichlorophenyl) -3,3-dimethylurea

5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid

N-3-hydroxyoctanoyl-i-homoserine lactone

PD

· NC

1-(benzo[d][1,3]dioxol-4-yl)-2-(methylamino)p..

FIGURE 4 |    Metabolomic analysis in PD patients and normal controls, and the analysis of metabolic pathways. (A) PCA analysis describes trends in the overall distribution between samples in the PD and NC groups. (B) OPLS-  DA revealed significant intergroup discrimination between PD and NC groups. (C) VIP value plots of the differential metabolites (top 20 based on VIP value). (D) The KEGG differential metabolic pathway plot (top 20 enriched metabolic pathways based on hit count). PD, PD group; NC, Normal control group.

differences  between  groups  [30].  These  findings  collectively indicate  that  gut  microbiota  may  play  a  critical  role  in  PD pathogenesis.

In this trial, PD patients received a probiotic formulation containing  four  strains: Bacillus  licheniformis , Bifidobacterium longum , Lactobacillus  acidophilus ,  and Enterococcus  faecalis .  After  12 weeks  of  probiotics  treatment,  the  UPDRS  scores decreased in PD patients, and LEDD was reduced in the probiotics group. Another study [31] demonstrated that probiotics improved MDS-  UPDRS scores in PD patients.  However,  variations in probiotic strains and dosing regimens between studies limit the comparability of these results. In addition, in this study, we found that probiotics supplementation improved RBD symptoms and reduced RBDQ-  HK scores in PD patients. The probiotics used in this trial had a good safety profile. Some participants  voluntarily  continued  taking  the  probiotics  after  the trial concluded and tolerated them well.

Increasing numbers of preclinical and clinical studies indicate that supplementing probiotics can ameliorate motor symptoms, constipation, anxiety, and depression in PD patients [18, 32]. To our knowledge, this study is the first to provide clinical evidence demonstrating that probiotics can improve RBD symptoms in

PD patients. RBD is not only a typical non-  motor symptom of PD but also an important biomarker during its prodromal phase [33]. Recent evidence suggests that PD may have two distinct origins based on its pathological changes: one originating from the central nervous system and the other from the peripheral autonomic nervous system. These origins are categorized as 'brainfirst'  and  'body-  first'  pathways,  respectively  [34].  Research indicates  that  PD-  RBD  patients  predominantly  present  as  the 'body-  first' subtype, exhibiting initial abnormalities in the enteric parasympathetic nervous system function before the onset of dopamine reduction in the brain [35]. Moreover, emerging evidence indicates that gut microbiota alterations in RBD patients mirror those observed in early-  stage PD; decreased abundance of Butyricicoccus and Faecalibacterium may represent potential markers for the progression from RBD to PD [36]. Therefore, gut microbiota disturbance may predispose patients to develop RBD and subsequently progress to PD. Probiotics intervention shows potential for ameliorating RBD symptoms through gut microbiota modulation. In addition, whether probiotics can slow the neurodegeneration process of iRBD deserves further study.

More  importantly,  we  further  investigated  the  mechanisms by which probiotics improve clinical symptoms in PD patients through  analysis  of  gut  microbiota  and  plasma  metabolism.

Scores Plot

Standardised value

PC 2 ( 16.4%)

· AP

· P

FIGURE 5 |    Metabolites and metabolic pathways analysis in the probiotics group. (A) PCA analysis of serum metabolites, depicting clustering patterns between pre- and post-  intervention groups. (B) The VIP value plots of the differential metabolites. (C) K-  means subcluster analysis was performed to assess trends in the relative abundance of metabolites across experimental groups. (D) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, highlighting significantly perturbed metabolic pathways. AP, After intervention of probiotic group; AC, After observation of control group; C, Control group; NC, Normal control group; P, Probiotic group.

First, fecal analysis revealed that the intestinal flora of PD patients differed from normal controls, with increased microbial α-  diversity observed in the PD cohort. Multiple studies with different sample sizes and different populations have consistently demonstrated that PD patients exhibit dysbiosis of gut flora, but the specific bacterial taxa showing differential abundance vary between studies [37-40]. Several studies have shown a reduction in Prevotella and an increase in Bifidobacterium in PD. In this experiment, we also found decreased Alloprevotella in the PD group, but no significant increase in Bifidobacterium .  The variability observed across studies may be attributed to several factors,  including  differences  in  sample  size,  dietary  patterns, geographic location, and race. The α-  diversity  and  β-  diversity of  gut  microbiota  showed  no  significant  changes  following probiotic intervention, which is consistent with prior research findings. These findings suggest that supplementing probiotics does not cause substantial perturbations in overall gut microbiota composition among PD patients, but rather exerts its therapeutic effects through altering specific functional bacteria. The abundance of Actinobacteria , Negativicutes , Peptoniphilus\_coxii , Gordonibacter , Bacillus\_sp.\_SB47 , Streptococcus\_mutans\_U2B , and Lactobacillus\_casei increased,  while  the  abundance  of

Lactococcus , Enterococcus \_ faecium , Comamonas\_kerstersii , and Ruminococcaceae\_bacterium GD-  1 decreased in fecal specimens  from  PD  patients  after  probiotics  supplementation.  No notable difference was observed in the vast majority of bacteria, showing the inherent resilience of intestinal microorganisms in PD patients.

Correlation analyses revealed significant negative associations between Butyricoccus abundance and clinical measures, including  UPDRS,  UPDRS-  III,  and  H-  Y. Butyricoccus  is a  common probiotic that works by producing short-  chain fatty acids such as  butyric  acid  [41].  In  the  MPTP-  induced  PD  mouse  model, Butyricoccus improved  motor  function  and  reduced  the  loss of  dopaminergic neurons [42]. Engineering strain Clostridium butyricum-  GLP-  1 enhanced motor function by upregulating TH expression  and  downregulating  α-  syn  expression  and  restoring gut microbiota balance [43]. Also, decreased abundance of Butyricoccus may represent potential markers for the progression  from  RBD  to  PD.  These  findings  position Butyricoccus as  a  promising  probiotic  candidate  for  PD  therapeutics,  with mechanisms potentially involving dopaminergic protection and microbiota-  gut-  brain axis modulation.

Romboutsia

·Fusicatentbacter

FIGURE 6 |    Correlations among clinical scores, gut microbiota, and plasma metabolites in PD patients. (A) Association between plasma metabolites and gut microbiota. (B) Association between plasma metabolites and clinical scores. (C) Association between clinical scores and gut microbiota. * p &lt; 0.05. ** p &lt;  0.01.

Metabolomics  analysis  in  this  study  found  reduced  serum  theophylline  levels  in  the  PD  group  compared  to  normal  controls, which  is  consistent  with  prior  findings  by  Ohmichi  et  al.  [44]. Theophylline acts as a non-  selective receptor antagonist of adenosine. Adenosine A2A receptors can form a heterodimer with the dopamine D2 receptor, and activation of the A2A receptor can inhibit the effect of dopamine [45]. Previous research has demonstrated that  the  A2A  receptor  antagonist  could  improve  clinical  symptoms in PD patients and reduce daily OFF time [46-48]. In this study, K-  means cluster analysis revealed that theophylline levels were restored after probiotics intervention. As an adenosine receptor antagonist, theophylline may activate dopamine D2 receptors via A2A receptor inhibition, suggesting that probiotics may exert part  of  their  therapeutic  effect  by  elevating  theophylline  levels. Arginine is a precursor for nitric oxide (NO), and excessive NO production can lead to oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, both of which play key roles in the pathogenesis of PD [49]. Previous studies have found that exercise can have a therapeutic effect on PD by inhibiting arginine biosynthesis and NO production [50, 51]. This study also found that serum L-  arginine levels in PD patients were significantly reduced after probiotic treatment. KEGG analysis  further  revealed  that  the  arginine  biosynthesis pathway was significantly affected, suggesting that probiotic supplementation improved amino acid metabolism in PD patients. In addition, PD is associated with glucose metabolism disorders [52]. This study demonstrated that probiotic treatment could modulate these disturbances by affecting pathways related to carbohydrate digestion  and  absorption,  starch  and  sucrose  metabolism,  and 2-  hydroxycarboxylic acid metabolism. Together, these results indicate that probiotic supplementation improved both amino acid metabolism and energy metabolism in PD patients.

The human gut microbiota likely influences levodopa efficacy. It  was  reported  that Enterococcus  faecalis can  decarboxylate levodopa  to  dopamine  in  the  intestine,  thereby  reducing  the amount of dopamine that ultimately reaches the central nervous system [53]. Although the probiotics used in this study contained Enterococcus faecalis , LEDD decreased, and the symptoms of PD patients  improved  following  12 weeks  of  probiotics  treatment. Notably,  microbiome  analysis  revealed  no  corresponding  increase in Enterococcus faecalis abundance, suggesting these effects may result from complex interactions of intestinal bacteria. The mechanism underlying the LEDD reduction is unclear. Is it due to probiotics influencing levodopa metabolism, or through the microbiome-  gut-  brain axis? Further levodopa pharmacokinetic studies could be performed to clarify whether multi-  strain probiotics affect levodopa metabolism.

There are some limitations in this study. First, the intervention period was limited to 12 weeks, and the sample size was small; therefore, larger and longer-  term follow-  up studies are needed to confirm the findings. Second, microbial composition varies across intestinal regions, and fecal microbiota only represents the distal gut community rather than the entire gut microbiota. Third, the effect of probiotics on levodopa pharmacokinetics remains unclear, and further research is needed.

## 5   |   Conclusion

In  summary,  our  research  demonstrated  that  PD  patients  exhibit gut microbiota dysbiosis; 12-  week probiotics supplementation in PD patients improved both motor symptoms and RBD

Gordonibacter

symptoms. Furthermore, the probiotics intervention was found to partially modulate gut microbial composition and plasma metabolite profiles.

## Author Contributions

Yitong Du: design and execution of data analysis; preparation of the initial manuscript draft. Houzhen Tuo: project administration; manuscript review. Lin Wang, Ying Cui, Xiaojiao Xu, Mingkai Zhang, Yue Li, Ting Gao, Dan Gao, Zhi Sheng, and Shiya Wang: conduct of the research project and data collection. All authors contributed to the preparation of the manuscript and approved the final version for submission.

## Acknowledgments

We express our deepest gratitude to the patients  who  participated  in this study.

## Conflicts of Interest

All authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Data Availability Statement

Datasets are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Table 1

| 0                             | 1           | 2            | 3            | 4               | 5         | 6         | 7                  | 8         | 9        | 10              |
|:------------------------------|:------------|:-------------|:-------------|:----------------|:----------|:----------|:-------------------|:----------|:---------|:----------------|
| p -value (between groups)     | 0.48 a      | 0.08 b       | 0.98 c       | 0.22 b          | 0.14 c    | 0.009 f   | 0.004 f            | 0.015 f   |          | 0.02 b          |
| p -value                      | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | 0.34 d    | 0.012 e            | 1 d       |          | -               |
| =25) Change                   | -           | -            | -            | -               |           | 1.8±13.1  | 0 (0, 50)          | 0±5.8     |          | -               |
| Control group End-of-trail    | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | 29.7±14.4 | 325 (187.5, 512.5) | 30.6±11.1 |          | 1               |
| Baseline                      | 64.8±8.7    | 48.0         | 2 (1.5, 2.5) | 23 (92)         | 17.7±10.8 | 27.9±14.7 | 325 (162.5,        | 30.6±11.3 | ( n =17) | 0               |
| p -value                      | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | 0.004 d   | 0.048 d            | <0.001 d  |          | -               |
| ( n =25) Change               | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | - 4.8±7.5 | - 21.5±50.4        | - 7.5±6.5 |          | -               |
| Probiotics group End-of-trail | -           | -            | -            | -               | -         | 26.4±11.2 | 330.0±183.7        | 28.4±12.2 |          | 8               |
| Baseline                      | 66.7±9.1    | 72.0         | 2 (2, 2.5)   | 20 (80)         | 20.4±7.8  | 31.2±9.9  | 351.5±194.6        | 35.9±11.9 | ( n =21) | 0               |
|                               | Age (years) | Males, n (%) | Modified H&Y | Levodopa, n (%) | UPDRS-III | UPDRS     | LEDD (mg/day)      | RBD-HK    |          | RBD improvement |