## Preclinical Catecholaminergic Biomarkers of Central Lewy Body Diseases

David S. Goldstein

The Autonomic and Catecholamine Healthspan Institute, LLC., Potomac, MD, USA

Received Revised

October 29, 2025

November 13, 2025

Accepted

November 14, 2025

## Correspondence

David S. Goldstein, MD, PhD The Autonomic and Catecholamine Healthspan Institute, LLC., c/o ACHI, 7711 Fontaine Street, Potomac, MD 20854, USA

Tel

E-mail goldsteind@ninds.nih.gov

In the central Lewy body diseases (LBDs) Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), by the time parkinsonism or cognitive dysfunction manifests, substantial central neurodegeneration has already occurred. Biomarkers of preclinical disease are needed to test strategies that might delay the onset of symptomatic central LBDs and extend healthspan. The prospective, longitudinal PDRisk study asked whether cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging, cerebrospinal fluid catecholamine metabolites, cardiovascular physiological biomarkers, and alpha-synuclein seeding activity predict central LBDs in at-risk individuals. This review highlights and builds on several findings from this unique study. Some concepts induced from the present and previous data are: 1) Central LBDs can begin outside the brain ('body-first'), with early involvement of cardiac sympathetic nerves as evidenced by 18 F-dopamine positron emission tomography (PET) and normal initial putamen dopaminergic innervation by 18 F-DOPA PET. 2) DLB can follow a similar body-first progression pattern. 3) Body-first LBDs entail triphasic temporal sequences, corresponding conceptually to homeostasis, dyshomeostasis, and symptomatic disease, noted in the heart years before the striatum. 4) LBDs feature a vesicular storage defect in extant catecholaminergic terminals, exemplifying the 'sick-but-not-dead' phenomenon. 5) There are multiple other functional abnormalities in residual catecholaminergic terminals in LBDs. 6) Based on computational modeling, disease-modifying treatments begun in the dyshomeostatic phase might delay the onset of symptomatic LBDs, compressing morbidity.

Keywords biomarker; healthspan; catecholamine; sympathetic; Lewy.

## COMPRESSION OF MORBIDITY AS A SOCIETAL GOAL

For a given lifespan, extending healthspan-the period of life when a person is free from serious chronic illness or debility-compresses the duration of morbidity. 1 In a seminal paper published in 1980, 2 James Fries proposed that, theoretically, with improvements in prevention and lifestyle, the symptomatic onset of aging-related degenerative diseases could be delayed, leading to a shorter period of morbidity before death.

From the standpoint of chronic neurodegenerative diseases, a straightforward question is: How can one identify pathogenetic processes in a preclinical phase, when disease-modifying treatments might extend healthspan? For addressing the 'how?' question scientifically, there are inherent limitations of conducting observational/retrospective cohort studies. One limitation is based on the logical dictum that one cannot prove a converse to be true. For instance, even if all patients with Parkinson disease (PD) had in vivo evidence for with an as yet undiagnosed neurodegenerative disorder the abnormal finding would unequivocally establish PD. There could be alternative diagnoses (imperfect specificity). 3-6 De- cc   This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

tecting preclinical disease requires moving beyond cross-sectional in vivo 7 or post-mortem neuropathological 8 studies.

Prospective, longitudinal studies, while preferable, also have inherent limitations. They take a long time, they are expensive, there are delays in data analysis and reporting, and generalizability and reproducibility are unclear. A compromise is to study patients with 'prodromal' conditions, such as rapid eye movement behavior disorder 9,10 and pure autonomic failure. 11-13

## THE PDRisk STUDY

The PDRisk study (NIH Clinical Protocol 09N0010) was an intramural National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) initiative that enrolled individuals who had multiple risk-factors for PD and tested the hypothesis that among risk-matched individuals those demonstrating biomarkers of catecholamine deficiency in the heart or brain would go on to develop PD during long-term follow-up. The study began in 2009 and ended in 2025.

Participants first entered their risk factor information at a protocol-specific website detailing known or putative risk factors (family history of PD, impaired olfaction, dream enactment behavior, orthostatic intolerance). If they had at least three of the four risk factors confirmed by on-site screening at the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center, they were invited to return for comprehensive inpatient evaluation, which included autonomic function testing, lumbar puncture for assays of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of catechols, cardiac sympathetic neuroimaging by 18 F-dopamine positron emission tomography (PET), and striatal dopaminergic neuroimaging by 18 F-DOPA (3,4-dihydroxyphe  nylalanine) PET. They returned for inpatient follow-up evaluations (without repetition of the lumbar puncture) at approximately 1.5year intervals for up to 5 follow-up visits (about 7.5 years) or until a board-certified, blinded neurologist diagnosed PD. The overall aim was to identify pre-clinical biomarker signatures that predicted a subsequent diagnosis of PD.

The choice of risk factors for the PDRisk study was rather prescient, because they corresponded to what is now referred to as the 'body-first' type of spread of synucleinopathy. 14 According to the body-first/brain-first framework, body-first PD begins with alpha-synuclein (α-syn) pathology in the autonomic nervous system, with later retrograde and rostral ascent to involve brainstem structures and then the substantia nigra. The PDRisk study inclusion criteria emphasized early autonomic and non-motor features-e.g., olfactory dysfunction, dream enactment behavior, and orthostatic hypotension-that precede dopaminergic motor symptoms, mirroring the sequence of peripheral-to-central

progression that defines the body-first trajectory. Thus, the PDRisk study design-screening for individuals with multiple prodromal autonomic and non-motor risk factors and testing for biochemical or imaging evidence of catecholaminergic deficiency in the heart or brain-anticipated the current view that gastrointestinal parasympathetic and cardiac sympathetic lesions identify individuals in the preclinical phase of body-first PD. 15

Data from the PDRisk study have been published in several reports. The following discussion summarizes sum of the key findings and inferences drawn from them.

1) Among risk-matched individuals who developed a central Lewy body disease (LBD) during follow-up (LBD+ group), 89% had low 18 F-dopamine-derived radioactivity upon initial evaluation, whereas among those who did not develop a central LBD (LBD- group), 4% had low radioactivity initially-more than a 20-fold difference. Low myocardial 18 F-dopamine-derived radioactivity therefore predicted a subsequent diagnosis of a central LBD. 16,17 Since none of the LBD+ participants had parkinsonism or cognitive dysfunction initially, 18 F-dopamine PET provides a sensitive marker of preclinical LBDs.

2) LBD+ participants had lower CSF DOPA and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) levels at the time of the initial evaluation than did those who remained disease free (LBD-). All individuals with both low DOPA and low DOPAC developed PD, while none with normal levels of both neurochemicals did so during the follow-up period. Reduced CSF DOPA and DOPAC therefore can identify central dopamine deficiency years before motor symptoms, suggesting that in PD central dopaminergic neurodegeneration can be detected biochemically in a preclinical phase. 18

3) At-risk PDRisk study participants in the LBD+ group had greater orthostatic blood-pressure drops, longer pressure-recovery times, and larger baroreflex areas after the Valsalva maneuver compared with the LBD- group, whereas cardiovagal baroreflex indices were normal. 19 A total of 89% of the individuals in the LBD+ group initially had a prolonged pressure recovery time after the Valsalva maneuver, compared to 28% in the LBD- group, about a 3-fold difference. 19 Therefore, baroreflex-sympathoneural impairment seems to be an early physiological biomarker of preclinical central LBDs, offering a non-invasive, relatively inexpensive and available measure that could be part of a screening test before PET and CSF analyses.

4) In addition to catecholaminergic PET neuroimaging, CSF biochemical, and cardiovascular physiological markers, the PDRisk program included assays of CSF α-syn seeding activity (SSA). 20 A total of 88% of the individuals in the LBD+ group had elevated average areas under the curve for CSF

18F-DOPA

JCN

4 Years

SSA, in contrast with 17% in the LBD- group, about a 5-fold difference. 20 A subset of participants with low cardiac 18 Fdopamine-derived radioactivity and reduced CSF DOPA+ DOPAC also showed positive SSA, whereas virtually all controls and biomarker-negative participants did not have increased SSA. 20 Among the seeding-positive cases, some subsequently developed PD or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 21

- 5) Two PDRisk study participants developed DLB, died, were autopsied, and had post-mortem neuropathological and neurochemical assessments (Patients A and B in Fig. 1).

Sympathetic Chain

Patient A had long-standing pure autonomic failure (PAF) before enrolling the PDRisk study. 18 F-dopamine PET indicated cardiac noradrenergic deficiency, and there was deposition of α-syn in dermal sympathetic noradrenergic nerve fibers in a skin biopsy. Initially, putamen 18 F-DOPA-derived radioactivity was normal; however, at about the time he manifested his first symptom of DLB (visual hallucinations) the pattern of putamen radioactivity resembled that in PD. 22 Post-mortem analyses showed remarkable loss of immunoreactive tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and many α-syn fibrils in

Fig. 1. In vivo and post-mortem findings in two PDRisk study participants (A and B) who developed DLB according to a 'body-first' progression pattern. The control subject has immunoreactive TH fibers (red) coursing parallel to fibers containing smooth muscle actin (blue) in an arrector pili muscle from a skin biopsy; immunoreactive α -syn (green) and α -syn colocalized with TH (yellow in the merged image) are not seen. In the corresponding image from Patient A, there are multiple areas with α -syn-TH colocalization (one site highlighted by the yellow circle). Initially, in Patient A striatal 18 FDOPA-derived radioactivity was normal (right striatum shown, spectral intensity scale with maximum radioactivity in red). Four years later there was decreased radioactivity in the putamen (arrow). Post-mortem, there was hardly any immunoreactive TH in sympathetic chain tissue, and there were abundant α -syn fibrils, with decreased numbers of cells as indicated by the nuclear stain DAPI (blue). In Patient B, myocardial perfusion by 13 NH3 PET was persistently normal, while left ventricular myocardial 18 F-dopamine-derived radioactivity was markedly decreased (white dashed line placed manually to correspond to the border of the left ventricle). Striatal 18 F-DOPA-derived radioactivity was persistently normal throughout participation in the PDRisk study. The patient died after having been diagnosed clinically with DLB. Post-mortem there were abundant colocalization of α -syn with TH (yellow), as well as fibers containing TH (red) and α -syn (green) without colocalization. 18 F-DA, 18 F-dopamine; 18 F-DOPA, 18 F-dihydroxyphenylalanine; α -syn, alpha-synuclein; DLB, dementia with Lewy bodies; PET, positron emission tomography.

Catecholamine Stores

(Fraction of Normal)

Cardiac

18F-DA

Putamen

sympathetic chain, with decreased putamen dopamine and Lewy bodies in the brainstem. Patient B went through the entire PDRisk study (about 8 years) without evidence of a movement disorder or cognitive dysfunction. Upon initial evaluation there was decreased cardiac 18 F-dopamine-derived radioactivity and increased CSF SSA. After completing participation in the PDRisk study he had progressive cognitive impairment and was diagnosed with DLB. Post-mortem neurochemistry demonstrated severely decreased myocardial norepinephrine and putamen dopamine concentrations. There were abundant nerve fibers in the sympathetic chain that contained α-syn (Fig. 1B). 21 These two cases provide compelling evidence that body-first progression can occur in DLB.

Overall, based on the PDRisk study data, combined neuroimaging ( 18 F-dopamine PET), biochemical (CSF DOPA, DOPAC), physiological (baroreflex-sympathoneural function), and CSF SSA assays provide a convergent, multimodal biomarker profile for detecting preclinical LBDs.

## THE 'SICK-BUT-NOT-DEAD' PHENOMENON

In 2011 we reported evidence that LBDs such as PD with orthostatic hypotension and PAF are attended by impaired vesicular sequestration of catecholamines within residual sympathetic nerves. 23 Using cardiac 18 F-dopamine PET to visual myocardial sympathetic innervation, 24 combined with arterial plasma measurements of 18 F-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid ( 18 F-DOPAC), the main neuronal metabolite of 18 F-dopamine, 25 we derived an index of vesicular uptake (the ratio of myocardial 18 F-dopamine-derived radioactivity to arterial 18 F-DOPAC). We found that patients with LBDs had markedly decreased vesicular uptake indexes compared to patients with multiple system atrophy (MSA) and control subjects, indicating that beyond denervation there is a defect in vesicular uptake of cytoplasmic catecholamines in LBDs.

Other novel technologies such as multitracer sympathetic neuroimaging using 18 F-dopamine and 11 C-methylreboxetine, a ligand for the cell membrane norepinephrine transporter, and post-mortem neurochemical analyses have also indicated a vesicular storage defect in cardiac sympathetic nerves 26-29 in LBDs but not in MSA. In contrast, in vivo and post-mortem studies have supported decreased vesicular sequestration of cytoplasmic catecholamines in putamen dopaminergic terminals in PD and the parkinsonian form of MSA but not in PAF. 30,31

Within the NINDS PDRisk study, two findings have also pointed to a vesicular storage defect in catecholaminergic neurons and provided new information about when in the

course of development of central LBDs this functional abnormality arises. In the heart, analyses of 18 F-dopamine-derived radioactivity over time within PET sessions showed that in at-risk individuals, accelerated loss of myocardial radioactivity predicted the later development of a symptomatic central LBD. 17 Conversely, upon initial evaluation the LBD+ group had more rapid loss of cardiac 18 F-dopaminederived radioactivity than did the LBD- group. The LBD+ group also had accelerated loss of putamen 18 F-DOPA-derived radioactivity. These observations indicated that biomarkers of a vesicular storage defect in cardiac noradrenergic or nigrostriatal dopaminergic terminals can identify preclinical central LBDs.

## TRI-PHASIC PROGRESSION

Computational modeling of trends over time suggests a triphasic decline in catecholamine stores in LBDs (Fig. 2). 32 We have conceptualized that the pathogenetic processes begin many years before they manifest clinically. At first, vesicular catecholamine stores are maintained via a variety of compensatory processes (homeostatic phase). 33 When these processes are overwhelmed or themselves malfunction, the stores decline rapidly (dyshomeostatic phase). Once the stores are decreased to about 20% of baseline, the patient notes the on-

Fig. 2. Concept diagram depicting tri-phasic losses of catecholamine stores in 'body-first' Lewy body diseases. Cardiac noradrenergic stores assessed by 18 F-DA positron emission tomography decline in a tri-phasic manner before tri-phasic decline in putamen 18 F-DOPA-derived radioactivity. The loss of left ventricular myocardial 18 F-DA-derived radioactivity proceeds from the inferolateral to the anterobasal wall, and the loss of putamen 18 F-DOPA-derived radioactivity proceeds from the posterior to anterior putamen. Symptoms manifest once catecholamine stores fall below 20% of baseline. Adapted from Goldstein et al. J Am Heart Assoc 2022;11:e024411., 32 under the terms of the Creative Commons License (CC-BY-NC). 18 F-DA, 18 F-dopamine; 18 F-DOPA, 18 F-dihydroxyphenylalanine.

TH

·DOPA

DA

set of symptoms. In the third phase (symptomatic disease) there is a further slow loss of vesicular stores. The trajectory of the lesion in the late dyshomeostatic/symptomatic period would follow a reverse exponential course, as has been observed in PD by serial 18 F-DOPA PET. 34

From the point of view of compression of morbidity, the most important implication from the PDRisk study is that in 'body-first' central LBDs the tri-phasic curve for cardiac noradrenergic deficiency precedes that for putamen dopaminergic deficiency (Fig. 2). This would enable studying whether disease-modifying treatment initiated during the dyshomeostatic phase delays the onset of symptomatic disease.

## A THIRD CAUSE OF CATECHOLAMINERGIC NEURODEGENERATION: AUTOTOXICITY

Besides genotypic variants and the exposome (the cumulative sum of environmental exposures), 35 a third, intrinsic source of disease in catecholaminergic neurons is autotoxicity. 36 Autotoxicity may account for the gradual buildup of allostatic load-the wear and tear of maintaining physiological stability through repeated stress responses. 37,38

Catecholaminergic neurons are uniquely vulnerable, because their normal signaling chemistry involves the synthesis and turnover of dopamine and norepinephrine, which are quite reactive as detailed below. Over time, even in the absence of genetic predispositions or toxin exposure, imperfect homeostasis in vesicular storage may allow small amounts of oxidative byproducts of catecholamine metabolism to accumulate. These reactive species could covalently modify proteins, damage mitochondria, and impair vesicular and lysosomal functions. The cumulative burden of these intracellular stresses constitutes a form of molecular allostatic load that may drive progressive cellular aging and neurodegeneration. Thus, with aging, neurons that continuously generate, oxidize, and recycle reactive neurotransmitters eventually may succumb to their own chemistry, potentially explaining why the incidence of central LBDs is increasing as populations are aging. 39,40

The pathophysiological mechanisms underlying catecholamine deficiencies in the brain and heart in LBDs remain incompletely understood. In 1997, a genetic cause of PD in a rare Greek-Italian-American kindred was identified-an A53T variant of the gene encoding the protein α-syn. 41 In the same year, Lewy bodies, a histopathological hallmark of sporadic PD, were found to contain abundant deposits of α-syn. 42 Numerous genome-wide association studies since then have noted α-syn variation as a genetic risk factor for PD 43-45 and the closely related condition DLB. 46

What links Lewy bodies/intra-neuronal α-syn deposition with catecholamine deficiency in LBDs? This fundamental question has not yet been answered definitively, although it is known that α-syn genotypic variants producing familial PD are associated with physiological evidence of baroreflexsympathoneural failure and neuroimaging evidence of cardiac noradrenergic deficiency. 47,48

A line of evidence over the past several years fits with the theory of catecholamine autotoxicity. 36,49 Dopamine is notoriously susceptible to spontaneous oxidation to form quinones, and several of the distal products are toxic, such as aminochrome, 50 salsolinols, 51 and 5-S-cysteinyldopamine. 52 Moreover, the spontaneous oxidation products interact with α-syn, 53-56 although the pathophysiological significance of the resulting changes in α-syn fibrils 57 or oligomers 58 is unclear.

Dopamine in the neuronal cytoplasm has three fates (Fig. 3). The predominant fate is active transport into vesicles. A second fate is spontaneous oxidation to form quinones and distal products. The third is enzymatic oxidation catalyzed by monoamine oxidase (MAO), which is localized to the outer mitochondrial membrane. Given the alternatives of

Fig. 3. Concept diagram depicting fates of cytoplasmic DA. DA in the neuronal cytoplasm is formed from the action of TH to form DOPA and of LAAAD to convert DOPA to DA. Cytosolic DA has three fates. The main fate is active uptake into vesicles via the VMAT. Vesicular DA can leak passively back into the cytoplasm or be released by exocytosis. The second fate is enzymatic deamination catalyzed by MAO in the outer mitochondrial membrane to form the autotoxic catecholaldehyde DOPAL. DOPAL is detoxified by the enzymatic action of ALDH to form DOPAC, which is actively extruded from the terminal. The third fate is spontaneous oxidation to form a variety of spontaneous oxidation products (Spont. Oxid. Products), which also are toxic. Neuronal DA turnover is determined mainly by the MAO → ALDH sequence, with a minor contribution of DA exocytosis with escape of neuronal reuptake. ALDH, aldehyde dehydrogenase; DA, dopamine; DOPA, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine; DOPAC, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; DOPAL, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde; LAAAD, L-aromatic-amino-acid decarboxylase; MAO, monoamine oxidase; TH, tyrosine hydroxylase; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter.

Arector pel a-syn Intensity

.D-

Amector pll TH Intensity

0.D-

Scalp skin NE [pmoling)

Fin

CTRL

0- spontaneous vs. enzymatic oxidation, the latter route would be expected to be preferred. 59 0.0CTRL PD 10% CTRL

The immediate products of the actions of MAO on dopamine are ammonia, hydrogen peroxide, and the catecholaldehyde 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL). DOPAL is highly toxic 60-62 and the centerpiece of the 'catecholaldehyde hypothesis' for the pathogenesis of PD. 63-65 Cytoplasmic norepinephrine has the same three fates, although it is a poorer substrate for both isoforms of MAO than is dopamine. 66

DOPAL is detoxified via the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), which converts the catecholaldehyde to DOPAC. As an acid, DOPAC is readily extruded from the cells. 67 Vesicular sequestration and the 2-step enzymatic sequence of MAO and ALDH normally keep cytoplasmic dopamine levels very low. 68,69 Genetically determined 70 or drug-induced 71-73 inhibition of ALDH results in accumulation of endogenous DOPAL; and putamen ALDH activity is decreased and DOPAL built up with respect to dopamine in animal models 71,73,74 and post-mortem in synucleinopathies. 31,75,76 Nevertheless, the pathophysiological significance of DOPAL-α-syn interactions in clinical LBDs remains unproven. 63

DOPAL potently oligomerizes, forms quinoprotein adducts with, and aggregates α-syn. 77,78 Moreover, DOPAL-in-

duced α-syn oligomers interfere with vesicular functions, 79 and vesicular uptake blockade augments DOPAL formation, 80 potentially setting the stage for destabilizing and potentially lethal positive feedback loops.

## PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF α-Syn DEPOSITION IN CATECHOLAMINERGIC NEURONS 4.0 20-

PD

More generally, the pathophysiological significance of α-syn deposition in catecholaminergic neurons in LBDs has not been shown. 81,82 Recent post-mortem and in vivo studies have addressed the pathophysiological significance of α-syn deposition in sympathetic nerves in PD. 83,84 In the post-mortem study, 83 sympathetic nerves in scalp skin, submandibular gland, and myocardium were examined from patients with autopsy-confirmed PD and control subjects. Although there was intra-neuronal α-syn deposition in all three tissues, substantial catecholamine deficiency (decreased TH immunoreactivity and norepinephrine content) was found only in the myocardium and not in skin or submandibular gland (Fig. 4). Thus, although the intra-neuronal α-syn de-

Fig. 4. Pathophysiological correlates of α -syn deposition. Green panel shows increased α -syn signal intensity in dermal arrector pili muscle (A), SMG (B), and apical left ventricular myocardium (C) on linear and logarithmic scales. Blue panel shows decreased TH signal intensity in myocardium (F) but not in arrector pili muscle or SMG (D and E). Red panel shows decreased NE content in myocardium (I) but not in arrector pili muscle or SMG (G and H). Adapted from Isonaka et al. Transl Neurodegener 2022;1 1:15., 83 under the terms of the Creative Commons License (CC BY). α -syn, alpha-synuclein; NE, norepinephrine; SMG, submandibular gland; TH, tyrosine hydroxylase.

CYTOPLASM

LAAAD

DBH

NE

VMAT\_NE

Release

* NE

Leak\_NE

position was widespread, it was dissociated from evidence of catecholamine neuronal loss or norepinephrine depletion in the extra-cardiac organs. DHPG

In the in vivo study, 85 the same group analyzed data from skin biopsies and cardiac 18 F-dopamine PET. Although individuals with LBDs had elevated α-syn/TH colocalization indices in cutaneous nerves, neither immunoreactive TH nor tissue norepinephrine was decreased. A similar set of findings has recently been reported for colocalization indices based on phosphorylated α-syn. 86 Taken together, the post-mortem and in vivo data argue against α-syn deposition per se being the proximate cause of sympathetic catecholaminergic deficiency and instead support the possibility that a parallel biochemical abnormality (impaired vesicular storage, toxic catecholaldehyde buildup, or other metabolic disturbance) underlies catecholaminergic dysfunction in LBDs. Indeed, it has been proposed that loss of monomeric α-syn ('synucleinopenia') rather than buildup of misfolded α-syn is the culprit in PD. 87 Thus, while α-syn pathology is a defining feature of LBDs, the evidence remains mixed as to whether the buildup of native or phosphorylated α-syn directly mediates neurodegeneration.

The finding of increased α-syn/TH colocalization indexes in sympathetic noradrenergically innervated dermal constituents in neurological post-acute COVID 84 suggests that the increases may reflect a post-infectious inflammatory/immune response rather than direct toxic injury. This echoes a case series in which cutaneous phosphorylated α-syn was detected despite the absence of prodromal neurodegenerative features. 88 Historically, the idea that viral illnesses can precipitate parkinsonism is well grounded-most famously in the post-encephalitic parkinsonism that followed von Economo's encephalitis during and after World War I-supporting a model in which infection-driven neuroinflammation causes or contributes to later motor syndromes. It should be recalled that the initial reports about striatal dopamine depletion reported similar decreases in idiopathic and postencephalitic PD. 89 Contemporary clinical data show that survivors of Japanese encephalitis virus infection-the most common human viral encephalitis in the world-can develop persistent parkinsonian syndromes. 90 These lines of evidence, while indirect, raise for further consideration the view that increased α-syn deposition in sympathetic nerves in LBDs might be an immuno-inflammatory epiphenomenon of an infectious illness.

* TYR -

## MULTIPLE FUNCTIONAL ABNORMALITIES IN CATECHOLAMINERGIC TERMINALS

Computational modeling has been applied to catecholaminergic neurons across diverse physiological and pathophysiological contexts such as exercise 91 and congestive heart failure. 92 These models have enabled estimation of rate-constants for key intra-neuronal processes related to biosynthesis, active vesicular uptake, passive vesicular leakage, and neuronal reuptake in health, stress, and disease.

Computational modeling based on in vivo and post-mortem data has identified multiple abnormalities of catecholamine synthesis and recycling in cardiac sympathetic nerves in LBDs. 93 These include decreased activities of the biosynthetic enzymes TH and L-aromatic-amino-acid decarboxylase and of the cell membrane norepinephrine transporter (Fig. 5). In an ongoing current project, analogous modeling is being applied to identify the main determinants of putamen dopamine deficiency in PD. This sort of approach may prove valuable for predicting progression trajectories and tracking effects of disease-modification strategies. 32

## TREATMENT IMPLICATIONS

It is by now clear that multiple, interacting intra-neuronal

Fig. 5. Multiple functional abnormalities in residual sympathetic noradrenergic nerves in LBDs. Red X marks placed to indicate reactions with decreased estimated rate constants in LBDs. DA, dopamine; DBH, dopamine-beta-hydroxylase; DHPG, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol; DOPAC, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; [DOPAL], 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde; [DOPEGAL], 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycolaldehyde; LAAAD, L-aromatic-amino-acid decarboxylase; LBDs, Lewy body diseases; Leak\_DA, leakage of vesicular dopamine; Leak\_NE, leakage of vesicular norepinephrine; MAO\_DA, monoamine oxidase acting on dopamine; MAO\_NE, monoamine oxidase acting on norepinephrine; NE, norepinephrine; TH, tyrosine hydroxylase; TYR, tyrosine; U1, uptake-1; VMAT\_DA, vesicular monoamine transporter acting on dopamine; VMAT\_NE, vesicular monoamine transporter acting on norepinephrine. Adapted from Goldstein et al. JCI Insight 2019;5:e130441., 93 under the terms of the Creative Commons License (CC-BY-NC).

mechanisms in residual nerves drive catecholaminergic neurodegeneration in LBDs. It is rational to target those mechanisms in translational clinical trials. First in importance seems to be impaired vesicular storage. There is reduced activity or expression of the type 2 VMAT, 94 which combined with increased vesicular leakage 79 may lower the ability of neurons to sequester dopamine and norepinephrine into vesicles, thereby decreasing the protected pool of catecholamines and increasing their residence in the cytoplasm. This defect is evident both in the putamen and heart. 29 Second, cytoplasmic catecholamines are metabolized by MAO to yield reactive catecholaldehydes-notably DOPAL from dopamine and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycolaldehyde from norepinephrine. 95-98 DOPAL covalently modifies and aggregates α-syn, inhibits key enzymes such as TH, 99 and damages mitochondria. 61 Third, deficient detoxification of DOPAL due to ALDH inhibition 70,71,100 amplifies DOPAL buildup, sustaining oxidative stress. Fourth, α-syn protein modifications compromise vesicular and mitochondrial functions, potentially precipitating multiple vicious cycles.

We envision a future in which individualized computational modeling based on biomarker panels enables devising personalized treatment regimens. The regimen might include combinations of MAO inhibitors, 101,102 dietary supplements such as N-acetylcysteine, 74,78,103 catechols derived from olives 104,105 or coffee, 106-108 or plant-derived levodopa. 109

If there were a program to identify predictive preclinical biomarkers, which individuals might benefit from the biomarkers information and from the targeted treatment? A starting point could be people who have a family history of PD, dementia, or Gaucher disease; have noted dream enactment behavior or decreased sense of smell without an identified cause; have a new onset of fatigue, orthostatic intolerance, and dyspnea on exertion; or have received an unanticipated positive test result for synucleinopathy in a skin biopsy. We would guess that most of these people would not have a preclinical central LBD. Nevertheless, the reassurance from having negative biomarkers of catecholamine deficiency would be of value. In the rare situation where such biomarkers were positive, a more comprehensive evaluation could be undertaken, with computational modeling for identifying the main determinant of the catecholamine deficiency (e.g., a vesicular storage defect) and for predicting effects of an individualized treatment regimen.

There is a real opportunity here for reducing the burden of neurodegenerative disorders by translational autonomic and catecholamine science. Further breakthroughs in this area could transform the trajectory of aging by enhancing resilience, maximizing healthspan, and compressing morbidity.

## Availability of Data and Material

Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the study.

## ORCID iD

https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5709-9940

## Conflicts of Interest

The author has no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.

## Funding Statement

Dr. Goldstein's research was supported by the Division of Intramural Research, NIH, NINDS.

## Acknowledgements

He retired in August, 2025.