ARTICLE

OPEN ACCESS

## Serum caffeine and metabolites are reliable biomarkers of early Parkinson disease

Motoki Fujimaki, MD, Shinji Saiki, MD, PhD, Yuanzhe Li, PhD, Naoko Kaga, PhD, Hikari Taka, PhD, Taku Hatano, MD, PhD, Kei-Ichi Ishikawa, MD, PhD, Yutaka Oji, MD, Akio Mori, MD, Ayami Okuzumi, MD, Takahiro Koinuma, MD, Shin-Ichi Ueno, MD, Yoko Imamichi, BS, Takashi Ueno, PhD, Yoshiki Miura, PhD, Manabu Funayama, PhD, and Nobutaka Hattori, MD, PhD

Neurology ® 2018;90:e404-e411. doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000004888

## Abstract

## Objective

To investigate the kinetics and metabolism of ca ff eine in serum from patients with Parkinson disease (PD) and controls using liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry.

## Methods

Levels of ca ff eine and its 11 metabolites in serum from 108 patients with PD and 31 agematched healthy controls were examined by liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry. Mutations in ca ff eine-associated genes were screened by direct sequencing.

## Results

Serum levels of ca ff eine and 9 of its downstream metabolites were signi fi cantly decreased even in patients with early PD, unrelated to total ca ff eine intake or disease severity. No signi fi cant genetic variations in CYP1A2 or CYP2E1 , encoding cytochrome P450 enzymes primarily involved in metabolizing ca ff eine in humans, were detected compared with controls. Likewise, ca ff eine concentrations in patients with PD with motor complications were signi fi cantly decreased compared with those without motor complications. No associations between disease severity and single nucleotide variants of the ADORA2A gene encoding adenosine 2A receptor were detected, implying a dissociation of receptor sensitivity changes and phenotype. The pro fi le of serum ca ff eine and metabolite levels was identi fi ed as a potential diagnostic biomarker by receiver operating characteristic curve analysis.

## Conclusion

Absolute lower levels of ca ff eine and ca ff eine metabolite pro fi les are promising diagnostic biomarkers for early PD. This is consistent with the neuroprotective e ff ect of ca ff eine previously revealed by epidemiologic and experimental studies.

## Classification of evidence

This study provides Class III evidence that decreased serum levels of ca ff eine and its metabolites identify patients with PD.

From the Department of Neurology (M.F., S.S., Y.L., T.H., K.-I.I., Y.O., A.M., A.O., T.K., S.-I.U., Y.I., M.F., N.H.), Research Institute for Diseases of Old Age (M.F., N.H.), and Laboratory of Proteomics and Biomolecular Science (N.K., H.T., T.U., Y.M.), Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.

The Article Processing Charge was funded by the authors.

This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND), which permits downloading and sharing the work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially without permission from the journal.

## Correspondence

Dr. Saiki ssaiki@juntendo.ac.jp or Dr. Hattori nhattori@juntendo.ac.jp

## MORE ONLINE

## Class of evidence

Criteria for rating therapeutic and diagnostic studies

[NPub.org/coe](http://npub.org/coe)

## RELATED ARTICLE

## Editorial

Ca ff eine and Parkinson disease: A possible diagnostic and pathogenic breakthrough

Page 205

## Glossary

A2A-R = adenosine 2A receptor; AUC = area under the curve; CYP1A2 = cytochrome P450 family 1 subfamily A member 2; CYP2E1 = cytochrome P450 family 2 subfamily E member 1; ExAC =ExomeAggregation Consortium; H&amp;Y =Hoehn&amp;Yahr; LC-MS = liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry; LED = levodopa equivalent dose; MIBG = 123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine; MMSE = Mini-Mental State Examination; MPTP = 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine; PD = Parkinson disease; ROC = receiver operating characteristic; SIFT = sorting intolerant from tolerant; SNV = single nucleotide variation; UPDRS = Uni fi ed Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale.

Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by motor and nonmotor symptoms. 1 There have been several reports suggesting an inverse association between daily ca ff eine consumption and a reduced risk of developing PD in men, and in women not taking hormone replacement therapy. 2,3 Ca ff eine can protect against nigral neurodegeneration in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) -induced PD mouse model. 4,5 Likewise, the ca ff eine metabolites paraxanthine and theophylline similarly attenuate MPTP neurotoxicity. 6 However, changes in the entire ca ff eine metabolic pathway in patients with PD remain unclear.

Clinically, ca ff eine appears to improve motor symptoms by antagonizing adenosine 2A receptors (A2A-Rs). 7 -9 One of the biological e ff ects of ca ff eine is the nonselective antagonism of A2A-Rs, which is encoded by the A2A-R gene ( ADORA2A ). Ca ff eine is primarily metabolized by 2 cytochrome P450 enzymes, cytochrome P450 family 1 subfamily A member 2 (CYP1A2) and cytochrome P450 family 2 subfamily E member 1 (CYP2E1). 10 -12 No associations between ADORA2A and CYP1A2 gene variants and polymorphisms and PD onset frequencies have been detected, 13 -15 but the association of ca ff eine with motor fl uctuations has not been addressed.

The development of blood-based biomarkers for PD is of high priority because of the easy sample collection procedure. 16 Four ca ff eine metabolites have been identi fi ed as biomarkers for de novo PD progression using gas chromatography -mass spectrometry and liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry (LC-MS). 17 We have also reported decreased serum levels of ca ff eine and 4 downstream metabolites in patients with PD receiving antiparkinsonian treatment. 18 Here we analyzed serum ca ff eine and metabolite concentrations and variations in ca ff eine-associated genes.

## Participants

We recruited 31 healthy controls (13 men) and 108 patients with PD without dementia (58 men) (table 1). All participants with PD had been treated at Juntendo University Hospital. Control participants were the patients ' spouses and patients with asymptomatic brain ischemia at

Juntendo University Hospital. Patients were eligible for inclusion if they were diagnosed with idiopathic PD based on Movement Disorders Society criteria, with no dementia (with a Mini-Mental State Examination [MMSE] score ≥ 24). 1 Hoehn &amp; Yahr (H&amp;Y) stages and Uni fi ed Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale motor section (UPDRS-III) scores were de fi ned during the ' on ' phase for practical and ethical reasons. Levodopa equivalent doses (LEDs) were calculated based on a previous report. 19 We assessed caffeine concentrations as 60 mg per cup of co ff ee, 30 mg per cup of tea, and 20 mg per cup of green tea, using the Food Society Commission of Japan guidelines. 20 No participant had a history of cancer, aspiration pneumonia, or collagen vascular diseases.

In addition to the cohort for serum ca ff eine metabolism analysis, we recruited an additional 51 healthy controls (25 men) (total controls = 82) and 67 patients with PD (33 men) (total patients with PD = 176) for gene analysis.

## Standard protocol approvals, registrations, and patient consents

This study protocol complied with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the ethics committee of Juntendo University (2012157). Written informed consent was given by all participants.

## Sample collection

Blood samples were collected at the outpatient department of Juntendo University Hospital between December 2013 and February 2014. Following overnight fasting (12 -14 hours), a serum sample was obtained using 7 mL EDTA2Na blood spits (PN7; SRL, Tokyo, Japan) followed by 2 -3 inversions. The samples then rested for 30 -60 minutes at 4°C followed by centrifugation for 15 minutes at ×3,000 g . The serum was separated into collection tubes and stored in liquid nitrogen until analysis.

## Sample preparation

Analyzers were blinded to all serum samples and participants ' information. We used the same methodology for the sample preparation as the one employed in a previous study. 21 Brie fl y, 100 μ L of serum was immediately plunged into 400 μ L acetonitrile with 200 pmol of ca ff eine-(trimethyl13 C3); 3-methylxanthine-2,4,5,613 C4, 1,3,915 N3; 7-methylxanthine-2,4,5,613 C4, 1,315 N2; paraxanthine-d3; and theophylline-213 C-1, 315 N2 were purchased from

Table 1 Demographic characteristics of participants

|                                             | Controls       | Patients with PD   | p Value a   |
| Number                                      | 31             | 108                | -           |
| Male:female                                 | 13:18          | 58:50              | 0.245 b     |
| Age, y, mean ± SD                           | 63.3 ± 11.5    | 67.1 ± 9.95        | 0.184       |
| Duration, y, mean ± SD                      | -              | 6.49 ± 5.66        | -           |
| H&Y stage, mean ± SD                        | -              | 2.13 ± 0.90        | -           |
| UPDRS-III, mean ± SD                        | -              | 13.6 ± 10.1        | -           |
| Coffee intake, cups/d, n                    | 6+; 0          | 6+; 1              | -           |
| Total caffeine consumption, mg/d, mean ± SD | 115.81 ± 69.22 | 107.50 ± 67.27     | 0.556       |

Abbreviations: H&amp;Y = Hoehn &amp; Yahr; PD = Parkinson disease; UPDRS = Unified Parkinson ' s Disease Rating Scale.

Total caffeine intake was calculated using the Food Society Commission of Japan guidelines. We assumed that the content of caffeine was 60 mg per cup of coffee, 30 mg per cup of tea, and 20 mg per cup of green tea.

b p Value obtained by χ 2 test.

a p Value obtained by Wilcoxon test.

Sigma (St. Louis, MO) as internal standards. The solution was centrifuged at ×17,000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C, and the upper aqueous layer collected and passed through a 0.2 μ m nylon fi lter. The sample was dissolved in 50 μ L of Milli-Q water after nitrogen drying and 5 μ L was applied to LC-MS analysis.

## Liquid chromatography -mass spectrometry

Ca ff eine and 11 downstream metabolites were separated by high-performance liquid chromatography (Gilson, Middleton, WI) using a Synergi Fusion RP column (100 × 3.0 mm, 2.5 μ mparticle, 100 ˚ A; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Column temperature was set at 50°C. The high-performance liquid chromatography system was connected to TSQ Quantum Ultra AM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scienti fi c; Waltham, MA). The target compounds were analyzed in selected reaction monitoring positive ionization mode.

## Genomic DNA analysis

DNA was extracted from peripheral blood according to standard protocol using a Qiagen (Venlo, the Netherlands) kit. To exclude the possibility that ca ff eine metabolism is accelerated by cytochrome P450 upregulation, 11,12 we performed genetic screening of CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 . Also, as PD motor fl uctuations might derive from altered sensitivity of A2A-R, a main target of ca ff eine and its metabolites, we investigated ADORA2A gene variations by direct sequencing. Pathogenicity of the identi fi ed missense variants was assessed using the sorting intolerant from tolerant (SIFT) method. 22 The frequencies of each variant were evaluated using the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) database (http://exac.broadinstitute.org/).

## Cardiac 123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy

All patients with PD underwent cardiac 123 Imetaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy to assess any cardiac sympathetic denervation in the heart. We used the same methodology as the one employed in a previous study. 23

## Statistical analysis

When a value was under the limit of detection, we assigned it half the minimum value of its compound. Wilcoxon tests were used to compare all individual analyses between controls and patients with PD. The Steel test, a nonparametric, multiple comparison test, was used to compare patients strati fi ed by H&amp;Ystage (I, II, III, and IV) and controls. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was carried out using JMP12 (SAS Institute Japan, Chuo-Ku), and the optimal cuto ff values and area under the curve (AUC) were calculated using Youden index maximums (sensitivity + speci fi city -1). 24 Pearson correlation coe ffi cients were used to assess the relationships between serum ca ff eine levels and LED or UPDRS in PD using JMP12. We used conditional logistic regression analyses to calculate odds ratios and 95% con fi dence interval for allelic and genotypic correlations with PD risk. p &lt; 0.05 Was considered statistically signi fi cant.

## Classification of level of evidence

This study is rated Class III because of the diagnostic case -control study design and the risk of spectrum bias.

Patients with PD and controls had similar mean ages at blood sampling (table 1). There were no signi fi cant differences in the sex ratio between patients with PD and controls. Importantly, no signi fi cant di ff erences in total ca ff eine intake between controls and patients with PD were revealed (table 1). Table e-1 (links.lww.com/WNL/A90) shows the H&amp;Y stages, UPDRS-III scores, MMSE scores, LED, co ff ee and ca ff eine consumption, and wearing-o ff and dyskinesia (expressed as motor fl uctuations) in these patients. On average, PD disease severity was mild to moderate according to H&amp;Y stage and UPDRS-III scores. When strati fi ed by disease severity, there were no signi fi cant di ff erences in the sex ratios of each group. Conversely, age, disease duration, UPDRS-III score, LED, and occurrences of wearing-o ff and dyskinesia (de fi ned as motor fl uctuations) signi fi cantly increased with disease severity. There was no di ff erence in age between patients with PD and controls in the larger gene analysis cohort (table e-2). No signi fi cant di ff erences between controls and patients with PD in sex or age were detected.

## Caffeine metabolite serum levels

Serum levels of ca ff eine and almost all of its 11 downstream metabolites were lower in patients with PD than in controls ( p &lt; 0.0001) (table 2 and fi gure e-1, links.lww.com/WNL/A89). The 3 main metabolites generated from ca ff eine -theophylline, theobromine, and paraxanthine -were signi fi cantly lower in patients with PD. Although 4 controls had extremely high serum ca ff eine levels, and were excluded as outliers, patients with PD still had lower ca ff eine levels ( p = 0.0004). Serum levels of ca ff eine in patients with PD correlated with ca ff eine consumption mildly ( p = 0.0476) compared with those in controls ( p = 0.0119) ( fi gure e-2). Serum levels of 1-methyluric acid did not di ff er between the 2 groups, but serum 1,3,7-trimethyluric acid levels were higher in patients with PD than in controls. However, 1-methyluric acid and 1,3,7-trimethyluric acid levels were under the limit of detection in 32% and 63% of participants, respectively.

## Associations of caffeine metabolites with H&amp;Y stage, UPDRS-III scores, and LED

Comparing controls and patients with PD in each H&amp;Y stage, most metabolites were lower in every H&amp;Y stage of PD (table e-3, links.lww.com/WNL/A90). However, there were no signi fi cant di ff erences in the serum levels of any metabolites in each H&amp;Y stage by the Steel test. We could not evaluate H&amp;Y stage V patients because only one was recruited. We analyzed the coe ffi cients of correlation between the serum levels of each metabolite and UPDRS-III scores (table e-4). As expected, UPDRS-III scores did not relate to the serum concentrations of any metabolite. On the contrary, these metabolites decreased even in the very early stage of PD. Although most patients were receiving some antiparkinsonian drug (98%), LED did not relate to the serum levels of any metabolite (table e-4).

## Diagnostic values of caffeine and metabolites using ROC curve analyses

To identify whether these metabolites could be potential diagnostic biomarkers for PD, we performed ROC curve analysis for multiple marker combinations using Youden index maximums (sensitivity + speci fi city -1) ( fi gure 1). 24 The AUC of ca ff eine at 33.04 pmol/10 μ L cuto ff was 0.78 and the sensitivity and speci fi city were 76.9% and 74.2%, respectively. The AUC improved (0.87) when the main metabolites of ca ff eine (i.e., theophylline, theobromine, and paraxanthine) were included. Moreover, we could distinguish patients with PD from controls more accurately using the data from all measurable metabolites (AUC 0.98).

## Associations of caffeine metabolites with constipation, motor fluctuations, and MIBG scintigraphy

In this study, motor complications, including wearing-o ff and dyskinesia, were observed in 47% of patients with PD. Disease severity was worse in those with motor complications than those without: UPDRS-III score (mean ± SD), with, 15.96 ± 10.78; without, 11.00 ± 8.40 ( p = 0.0084); H&amp;Y stage, with, 2.53 ± 0.92; without, 1.75 ± 0.71 ( p &lt; 0.0001). As expected, serum ca ff eine levels were signi fi cantly lower in PD with motor fl uctuations than without (table 3). 1,7-Dimethyluric acid showed similar tendency to ca ff eine ( p &lt; 0.0001). No signi fi cant changes of the other metabolites, including theophylline, theobromine, and paraxanthine, were detected in PDwith or without motor fl uctuations (data not shown). The

Table 2 Alterations in caffeine and metabolite levels in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) and controls

| Compounds                | Controls, mean ± SD (LLD)   | Patients with PD, mean ± SD (LLD)   | p Value   |
| Caffeine                 | 79.10 ± 91.5 (2)            | 23.53 ± 22.4 (4)                    | <0.0001   |
| Theophylline             | 14.40 ± 12.1 (2)            | 6.01 ± 4.7 (6)                      | <0.0001   |
| Theobromine              | 48.65 ± 46.9 (2)            | 24.50 ± 32.1 (5)                    | 0.0004    |
| Paraxanthine             | 73.71 ± 59.5 (2)            | 30.70 ± 23.9 (3)                    | <0.0001   |
| 1,7-Dimethyluric acid    | 1.59 ± 1.0 (2)              | 0.47 ± 0.6 (53)                     | <0.0001   |
| 1,3,7-Trimethyluric acid | 0.25 ± 0.4 (17)             | 0.69 ± 1.3 (71)                     | 0.0023    |
| 1-Methylxanthine         | 1.47 ± 0.9 (2)              | 0.70 ± 0.7 (23)                     | <0.0001   |
| 3-Methylxanthine         | 2.94 ± 3.3 (2)              | 1.44 ± 1.8 (30)                     | 0.0005    |
| 1-Methyluric acid        | 2.44 ± 2.0 (4)              | 1.97 ± 2.1 (41)                     | 0.1351    |
| 7-Methylxanthine         | 3.11 ± 2.9 (2)              | 1.63 ± 1.5 (15)                     | 0.0004    |
| AFMU                     | 2.17 ± 1.5 (2)              | 0.61 ± 0.5 (27)                     | <0.0001   |
| AAMU                     | 1.00 ± 0.8 (2)              | 0.548 ± 0.5 (21)                    | 0.0005    |

Abbreviations: AAMU = 5-acethylamino-6-amino-3-methyluracil; AFMU = 5-acethylamino-6-formylamino-3-methyluracil; H&amp;Y = Hoehn &amp; Yahr; LLD = lower limits of detection.

LLD levels were calculated as half the minimum value. p Values obtained by Wilcoxon test.

A. Caffeine

AUC 0.78

B. Caffeine and its main metabolites

Figure 1 Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves

C. All metabolites

ROC curves were made by the Youden index using the maximum of sensitivity + specificity -1 ([A] caffeine, [B] caffeine and its main metabolites, [C] all metabolites). The optimal cutoff point was calculated using the maximum sensitivity + specificity. The main metabolites were paraxanthine, theophylline, and theobromine. AUC = area under the curve.

occurrence (or predominance) of constipation, a common clinical feature of PD, was 75.9% and χ 2 tests revealed no statistical signi fi cance of ca ff eine levels in PD with or without it (table 3). Myocardial scintigraphy was performed in most patients with PD (71%), and a reduced early (or delayed) heart/mediastinum ratio of MIBG uptake, a well-established diagnostic characteristic as well as a disease severity biomarker, was evident in 71% of patients with PD. 25,26 However, the tests did not reveal any correlation between reduced MIBG uptake and serum ca ff eine concentrations (table 3).

## Analysis of genes associated with caffeine metabolism

Two single nucleotide variations (SNVs) in ADORA2A occurred at similar frequencies in patients with PD with motor complications to those without (data not shown). We detected 7 SNVs previously reported in the public ExAC

Table 3 Association between Parkinson disease serum caffeine levels and motor fluctuations, constipation, and 123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy

|                       | 108 patients with Parkinson disease   | 108 patients with Parkinson disease   |   p Value a |
| Motor fluctuation (n) | + (51)                                | (57)                                  |             |
| Mean ± SD             | 16.70 ± 14.5                          | 29.62 ± 26.4                          |      0.0132 |
| Constipation (n)      | + (82)                                | (26)                                  |             |
| Mean ± SD             | 23.12 ± 22.1                          | 24.83 ± 23.4                          |      0.6664 |
| MIBG (n)              | Normal (22)                           | Decrease (55)                         |             |
| Mean ± SD             | 16.17 ± 12.7                          | 27.75 ± 24.7                          |      0.1224 |

database (table 4). Four CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 SNVs (rs35796837, rs45486893, rs72559710, and rs28371746) were identi fi ed with similar frequencies in both patients with PDand controls. The other 3 (rs13306115, rs138652540, and rs72547517) were found only in patients with PD, at a higher frequency than in ExAC, but were not statistically signi fi cant. Another 3 SNVs, ADORA2A rs57851876, CYP1A2 rs2470890, and CYP2E1 rs2515641, were detected (table 4), with no signi fi cant di ff erences in frequency between patients with PD and controls. Overall our genomic analyses of ca ff eine-related genes revealed no di ff erences in SNV frequencies between patients with PD and controls.

## Discussion

In this study, the absolute serum concentrations of ca ff eine and 9 of its downstream metabolites were signi fi cantly lower in patients with PD than in controls. Both CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 , the main metabolizers of ca ff eine in humans, had no signi fi cant SNV di ff erences between controls and patients with PD. No signi fi cant associations between disease severity and the levels of each of metabolite were detected in patients with PD.

Ca ff eine metabolite pro fi les may be reliable diagnostic biomarkers for early PD. As patients with PD have severe H&amp;Y stages, occurrence ratio of motor fl uctuations increased more; however, levels of ca ff eine and theophylline mildly decreased, consistent with their protective e ff ect against progressive decline. Although theophylline and paraxanthine share pharmacologic properties with ca ff eine, as all 3 are adenosine receptor antagonists, the frequencies of ADORA2A SNVs were similar in patients with PD and controls.

The levels of ca ff eine and 9 related metabolites were signi fi cantly decreased in patients with PD, with the levels of 1,3,7-

AUC 0.87

AUC 0.98

Table 4 Alternative minor allele frequencies (MAFs) of ADORA2A , CYP1A2 , and CYP2E1 variants

| Gene and SNP   | cDNA      | Amino acid   |   Patients with PD |   Controls |   ExAC MAF | OR (95% CI)            | p Value a   |
| ADORA2A        |           |              |                    |            |            |                        |             |
| rs5751876      | c.1713T>C | Try361Try    |            0.52556 |    0.46341 |     0.5453 | 1.704 (0.875 - 3.319)  | 0.091       |
| rs13306115     | c.33G>A   | Thr11Thr     |            0.00284 |    0       |     5e-05  | -                      | -           |
| CYP1A2         |           |              |                    |            |            |                        |             |
| rs2470890      | c.1612T>C | Asn516Asn    |            0.15909 |    0.18292 |     0.4574 | 0.721 (0.397 - 1.312)  | 0.181       |
| rs138652540    | c.248C>T  | Thr83Met     |            0.00284 |    0       |     0.0001 | -                      | -           |
| rs3579837      | c.895G>A  | Gly299Ser    |            0.00852 |    0.00609 |     0.0014 | 1.401 (0.145 - 13.574) | 0.773       |
| rs45486893     | c.1313C>T | Thr438Ile    |            0.00852 |    0.00609 |     0.0016 | 1.401 (0.145 - 13.574) | 0.773       |
| rs72547517     | c.1381G>A | Glu461Lys    |            0.00284 |    0       |     2e-05  | -                      | -           |
| CYP2E1         |           |              |                    |            |            |                        |             |
| rs2515641      | c.1296C>T | Phe421Phe    |            0.15309 |    0.16463 |     0.1698 | 0.734 (0.393 - 1.371)  | 0.213       |
| rs72559710     | c.227G>A  | Arg76His     |            0.00284 |    0.0122  |     0.0003 | 0.231 (0.021 - 2.563)  | 0.205       |
| rs28371746     | c.909C>A  | Thr303Thr    |            0.02273 |    0.4268  |     0.0013 | 0.500 (0.178 - 1.404)  | 0.158       |

Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; ExAC = exome aggregation consortium; OR = odds ratio; PD = Parkinson disease; SNP = single nucleotide polymorphism.

a p Value obtained by Fisher exact test.

trimethyluric acid highly variable and below the limit of detection in more than 50% of patients with PD. 1,3,7Trimethyluric acid is a methyl derivative of uric acid, as well as a metabolite of methylxanthines including ca ff eine and theophylline, so it is di ffi cult to interpret the clinical signi fi cance of this.

Serum ca ff eine and estrogen share a common cytochrome P450 for their metabolism or detoxi fi cation. 27 According to epidemiologic and in vivo studies, higher estrogen levels attenuate the e ff ects of administered ca ff eine on nigral degeneration. 5,28 In this study, no signi fi cant di ff erences in ca ff eine and its metabolites were detected between male and female patients (data not shown). We speculate that higher ratios of postmenopausal women or ethnic di ff erences might in fl uence the relationship between PD and ca ff eine metabolism.

Autophagy, a protein degradation system removing neurodegeneration-associated proteins, 29 is associated with PD pathogenesis. However, a relatively high concentration of ca ff eine (&gt;5 mM) is required to exert any e ff ect on the induction of autophagy and apoptosis in tumor cell lines. 30 In vivo studies have demonstrated the neuroprotective e ff ects of ca ff eine, paraxanthine, and theophylline in MPTP PD mice models, 6 suggesting that ca ff eine and its metabolites may contribute to neuroprotection in PD.

Ca ff eine is actively absorbed from the small intestine and more than 95% is metabolized by CYP1A2. 31 Moreover, interindividual variations in CYP1A2 enzymatic activity correlate with di ff erences in ca ff eine metabolism. 32 The CYP1A2 rs762551 AA genotype is related to increased ca ff eine metabolism, 33 but this was not detected in patients with PD or controls in our cohort. Although the CYP1A2 rs2470890 CC genotype is associated with a decreased risk of PD in co ff ee drinkers, 34 this was present at a similar frequency in patients with PD and controls. However, no signi fi cant di ff erences in these allele frequencies between patients with PD and controls were detected. The frequency of the CYP1A2 rs35796837 and rs45486893, CYP2E1 rs72559710 and rs28371746, and CYP2E1 rs2515641 SNVs were similar in both groups. While ADORA2A rs13306115 is a synonymous amino acid variant, it is possible that the CYP1A2 rs138652540 and rs72547517 variants had di ff erent amino acids in ExAC. In particular, rs72547517 is predicted to be deleterious according to SIFT analyses 22 ; thus, further investigation in more cases is needed to clarify this relationship. Taken together, genetic changes in CYP1A2 , CYP2E1 , and ADORA2A , a ff ecting their ca ff eine metabolism gene products, may regulate receptor a ffi nity, but were not signi fi cantly detected in PD. This suggests that neither ca ff eine metabolism nor A2A-R sensitivity has any e ff ects on decreased serum levels of ca ff eine metabolites in PD or the incidence of motor fl uctuations, respectively.

Serum levels of ca ff eine and 9 related metabolites were uniformly and signi fi cantly decreased in patients with PD, despite an equivalent ca ff eine intake to controls. More importantly, serum levels of ca ff eine in patients with PD related to ca ff eine

intake signi fi cantly, but those in controls did more signi fi cantly, indicative of less ca ff eine absorption in patients with PD. Gastrointestinal dysfunction, especially constipation, a ff ects up to 80% of patients with PD and sometimes precedes the onset of symptoms by years. 35 A recent analysis revealed that fecal microbial fl ora is altered in PD, suggesting an environmental change in the large intestine. 36,37 Although constipation and fecal bacterial change are predominantly attributed to large intestine function, ca ff eine absorption mainly occurs in the small intestine, where bacterial overgrowth in PD is associated with levodopa malabsorption leading to motor fl uctuations. 31,38 Therefore, further studies should ascertain whether ca ff eine absorption in PD is altered by this.

We observed lower ca ff eine levels in patients with PD with motor fl uctuations. Ca ff eine inhibits A2A-R activation, 39 and PD motor symptoms improve with ca ff eine treatment. 8 Istradefylline is a therapeutic agent for PD, acting via A2A-R inhibition 40 and maintaining high ca ff eine serum concentrations, which may serve as a prophylaxis for motor fl uctuations. In this study, patients with PD with motor fl uctuations had lower levels of ca ff eine than those without, consistent with the bene fi cial e ff ects of A2A antagonism. Also, considering disease severity di ff erences between patients with PD with and without motor fl uctuations, lower levels of ca ff eine in patients with PD may result in greater disease progression.

A limitation of this study is that it was conducted at a single university hospital and severe PD cases (H&amp;Y IV and V) were not fully represented due to the history of aspiration pneumonia or cancer exclusion criteria. Thus, it is possible that we could not detect an association between disease severity and levels of ca ff eine and its metabolites due to the reduced power of the cohort. Also, antiparkinsonian medications may competitively in fl uence the metabolism of ca ff eine. However, at least in our cohort, no correlations between LED and the absolute concentrations of ca ff eine and its metabolites were detected. Similar to a recent study showing progressive decreases in ca ff eine metabolites with disease exacerbation, 17 de novo PD studies including larger study populations and studies on di ff erential diagnostic values among patients with PD and other parkinsonian patients should be performed.

We identi fi ed signi fi cantly decreased serum levels of ca ff eine and its downstream metabolites in patients with PD, suggesting early diagnostic biomarkers for the disease. However, we found no association between ca ff eine and its metabolites and disease severity, sex, and gene variants. Furthermore, signi fi cant decreases in ca ff eine and metabolites were detected in patients with PD with motor complications and more severe disease symptoms. This further indicates the neuroprotective e ff ects of ca ff eine.

## Author contributions

Motoki Fujimaki: study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data. Shinji Saiki: study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data, critical revision of manuscript for intellectual content. Yuanzhe Li: analysis of data. Naoko Kaga: analysis of data. Hikari Taka: analysis of data. Taku Hatano: study concept and design, acquisition of data. Kei-Ichi Ishikawa: acquisition of data. Yutaka Oji, acquisition of data. Akio Mori: acquisition of data. Ayami Okuzumi: acquisition of data. Takahiro Koinuma: acquisition of data. Shin-Ichi Ueno: acquisition of data. Yoko Imamichi: management of data. Takashi Ueno: analysis of data. Yoshiki Miura: analysis of data. Manabu Funayama: analysis of data. Nobutaka Hattori: study concept and design, critical revision of manuscript for intellectual content.

## Study funding

Supported by Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development -CREST (N.H.), Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology -Supported Program for the Strategic Research Foundation at Private Universities 2014 -2018 (N.H.), Grant-in-aid for Scienti fi c Research on Priority Area (S.S. 25111007, 25111001), and Grant-in-Aid for Scienti fi c Research (B) (S.S. 15H04843).

## Disclosure

M. Fujimaki reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. S. Saiki received research grants from Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (25111007, 25111001) and Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) (15H04843). Y. Li received a grant from JSPS (16K09700). N. Kaga reports no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. H. Taka received a grant from JSPS (16K01834). T. Hatano received a grant from JSPS (16K09675). K. Ishikawa received a grant from JSPS (16K19524). Y. Oji received a grant from JSPS (16H07184). A. Mori, A. Okuzumi, T. Koinuma, and S. Ueno report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. Y. Imamichi received a research grant from JSPS (16H00625). T. Ueno and Y. Miura report no disclosures relevant to the manuscript. M. Funayama received a grant from JSPS (16K09676). N. Hattori received personal fees from Hisamitsu Pharmaceutical, Dai-Nippon Sumitomo Pharma, Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Novartis Pharma, GlaxoSmithKline, Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim, FP Pharmaceutical, Eisai, Kissei Pharmaceutical, Janssen Pharmaceutical, Nihon Medi-Physics, and Kyowa Hakko-Kirin, outside of this work and received research grants from Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (CREST, program for Brain Mapping by Integrated Neurotechnologies for Disease Studies (Brain/ MINDS)) and JSPS (15H04842). Go to Neurology.org/N for full disclosures.

Received May 12, 2017. Accepted in fi nal form September 29, 2017.

## Table 1

| 0                                           | 1              | 2              | 3       |
|:--------------------------------------------|:---------------|:---------------|:--------|
| Number                                      | 31             | 108            | -       |
| Male:female                                 | 13:18          | 58:50          | 0.245 b |
| Age, y, mean ± SD                           | 63.3 ± 11.5    | 67.1 ± 9.95    | 0.184   |
| Duration, y, mean ± SD                      | -              | 6.49 ± 5.66    | -       |
| H&Y stage, mean ± SD                        | -              | 2.13 ± 0.90    | -       |
| UPDRS-III, mean ± SD                        | -              | 13.6 ± 10.1    | -       |
| Coffee intake, cups/d, n                    | 6+; 0          | 6+; 1          | -       |
|                                             | 4 - 5; 1       | 4 - 5; 3       |         |
|                                             | 1 - 3; 26      | 1 - 3; 79      |         |
|                                             | 0; 4           | 0; 25          |         |
| Total caffeine consumption, mg/d, mean ± SD | 115.81 ± 69.22 | 107.50 ± 67.27 | 0.556   |

## Table 2

| 0                        | 1                | 2                | 3       |
|:-------------------------|:-----------------|:-----------------|:--------|
| Caffeine                 | 79.10 ± 91.5 (2) | 23.53 ± 22.4 (4) | <0.0001 |
| Theophylline             | 14.40 ± 12.1 (2) | 6.01 ± 4.7 (6)   | <0.0001 |
| Theobromine              | 48.65 ± 46.9 (2) | 24.50 ± 32.1 (5) | 0.0004  |
| Paraxanthine             | 73.71 ± 59.5 (2) | 30.70 ± 23.9 (3) | <0.0001 |
| 1,7-Dimethyluric acid    | 1.59 ± 1.0 (2)   | 0.47 ± 0.6 (53)  | <0.0001 |
| 1,3,7-Trimethyluric acid | 0.25 ± 0.4 (17)  | 0.69 ± 1.3 (71)  | 0.0023  |
| 1-Methylxanthine         | 1.47 ± 0.9 (2)   | 0.70 ± 0.7 (23)  | <0.0001 |
| 3-Methylxanthine         | 2.94 ± 3.3 (2)   | 1.44 ± 1.8 (30)  | 0.0005  |
| 1-Methyluric acid        | 2.44 ± 2.0 (4)   | 1.97 ± 2.1 (41)  | 0.1351  |
| 7-Methylxanthine         | 3.11 ± 2.9 (2)   | 1.63 ± 1.5 (15)  | 0.0004  |
| AFMU                     | 2.17 ± 1.5 (2)   | 0.61 ± 0.5 (27)  | <0.0001 |
| AAMU                     | 1.00 ± 0.8 (2)   | 0.548 ± 0.5 (21) | 0.0005  |

## Table 3

| 0                     | 1            | 2             |      3 |
|:----------------------|:-------------|:--------------|-------:|
| Motor fluctuation (n) | + (51)       | (57)          |        |
| Mean ± SD             | 16.70 ± 14.5 | 29.62 ± 26.4  | 0.0132 |
| Constipation (n)      | + (82)       | (26)          |        |
| Mean ± SD             | 23.12 ± 22.1 | 24.83 ± 23.4  | 0.6664 |
| MIBG (n)              | Normal (22)  | Decrease (55) |        |
| Mean ± SD             | 16.17 ± 12.7 | 27.75 ± 24.7  | 0.1224 |

## Table 4

| 0           | 1         | 2         |       3 |       4 |      5 | 6                      | 7     |
|:------------|:----------|:----------|--------:|--------:|-------:|:-----------------------|:------|
| ADORA2A     |           |           |         |         |        |                        |       |
| rs5751876   | c.1713T>C | Try361Try | 0.52556 | 0.46341 | 0.5453 | 1.704 (0.875 - 3.319)  | 0.091 |
| rs13306115  | c.33G>A   | Thr11Thr  | 0.00284 | 0       | 5e-05  | -                      | -     |
| CYP1A2      |           |           |         |         |        |                        |       |
| rs2470890   | c.1612T>C | Asn516Asn | 0.15909 | 0.18292 | 0.4574 | 0.721 (0.397 - 1.312)  | 0.181 |
| rs138652540 | c.248C>T  | Thr83Met  | 0.00284 | 0       | 0.0001 | -                      | -     |
| rs3579837   | c.895G>A  | Gly299Ser | 0.00852 | 0.00609 | 0.0014 | 1.401 (0.145 - 13.574) | 0.773 |
| rs45486893  | c.1313C>T | Thr438Ile | 0.00852 | 0.00609 | 0.0016 | 1.401 (0.145 - 13.574) | 0.773 |
| rs72547517  | c.1381G>A | Glu461Lys | 0.00284 | 0       | 2e-05  | -                      | -     |
| CYP2E1      |           |           |         |         |        |                        |       |
| rs2515641   | c.1296C>T | Phe421Phe | 0.15309 | 0.16463 | 0.1698 | 0.734 (0.393 - 1.371)  | 0.213 |
| rs72559710  | c.227G>A  | Arg76His  | 0.00284 | 0.0122  | 0.0003 | 0.231 (0.021 - 2.563)  | 0.205 |
| rs28371746  | c.909C>A  | Thr303Thr | 0.02273 | 0.4268  | 0.0013 | 0.500 (0.178 - 1.404)  | 0.158 |